GOVERNMENT OF INDIA 












CAESAR AND CHRIST 



BOOKS BY WILL DURANT 


The Story of Philosophy 
Transition 

The Mansions of Philosophy 
Adventures in Genius 
The Story of Civilization: 

I. Our Oriental Heritage 

II. T he Life of Greece 

III. Caesar and Christ 





THE STORY OF C I V I L I Z A T I O N - ^ 

CAE S AR 
AND CHRIST 

'"I ! I 

A History of Roman Civilization and of 
Christianity from their beginnings to A.D. 3^5 

By Will Durant 



. / 



SIMON AND SCHUSTER 

NEW YORK : 1944 


About the Appearance of Books m Wartime 

A recent ruling by the War Production Board has cur- 
tailed the use of paper by book publishers in 1944. 

In line with this ruling and in order to conserv'e mate- 
rials and manpower, we are co-operating by: 

1. Using lighter-weight paper which reduces the bulk 
of our books substantially. 

2. Printing books with smaller margins and with more 

• words to each page. Result: fewer pages per book. 

Slimmer and smaller books will save paper and plate 
metal and labor. We are sure that readers will understand 
the publishers’ desire to co-operate as fully as p>ossible 
with the objectives of the War Production Board and our 
government. 


ENTRAL ARCHAEOI OOIGAL 


U/KZ 

, f ^ — 


/f . 3 

Ace. - *■ 


central 

Librar 

A«o. 

Date. 

Cai] Vo. 


'aU No- 

all RIGHTS. RESERVED 
including the right of reproduction 
in ’whole or in part in any form 
Copyright, 1944., by Will Durant 
Published by Simon and Schuster, Inc. 
Rockefeller Center, 12^0 Sixth Avenue, 
New York 20, N. Y. 

Heologigai 



/ 


Manufactured in the United States of America 
by H. Wolff Book Mfg. Co., New York City 



J 






TO ARIEL 



r 


( 


) 

4 





Preface 


T his volume, while an independent unit by itself, is Part III in a 
history of civihzation, of which Part I was Our Oriental Heritage, and 
Part II was The Life of Greece. War and health permitting. Part IV, The 
Age of Faith, should be ready in 1950. 

The method of these volumes is synthetic history, which studies all the 
major phases of a people’s life, work, and culture in their simultaneous opera- 
tion. Analytic history, which is equally necessary and a scholarly prerequis- 
ite, studies some separate phase of man’s activity— politics, economics, morals, 
rehgion, science, philosophy, literature, art— in one civilization or in all. The 
defect of the analytic method is the distorting isolation of a part from the 
whole; the weakness of the synthetic method lies in the impossibility of one 
mind speaking with firsthand knowledge on every aspect of a complex 
civilization spanning a thousand years. Errors of detail are inevitable; but 
only in this way can a mind enchanted by philosophy-the quest for under- 
standing through perspective— content itself with delving into the past. We 
may seek perspective through science by studying the relations of things in 
space, or through history by studying the relations of events in time. We shall 
learn more of the nature of man by watching his behavior through sixty 
centuries than by reading Plato and Aristotle, Spinoza and Kant. “All philos- 
ophy,” said Nietzsche, “has now fallen forfeit to history.” * 

The study of antiquity is properly accounted worthless except as it may 
be made living drama, or illuminate our contemporary life. The rise of Rome 
from a crossroads town to world mastery, its achievement of two centuries of 
security and peace from the Crimea to Gibraltar and from the Euphrates to 
Hadrian’s Wall, its spread of classic civilization over the Mediterranean and 
western European world, its struggle to preserve its ordered realm from a 
surrounding sea of barbarism, its long, slow crumbling and final catastrophic 
collapse into darkness and chaos— this is surely the greatest drama ever 
played by man; unless it be that other drama which began when Caesar and 
Christ stood face to face in Pilate’s court, and continued until a handful of 
hunted Christians had grown by time and patience, and through persecution 
and terror, to be first the allies, then the masters, and at last the heirs, of the 
greatest empire in history. 

• Human, All Too Human, Eng. tr.. New York, 1911, vol. II, p. 17. 

vii 



PREFACE 


But that multiple panorama has greater meaning for us than through its 
scope and majesty: it resembles significantly, and sometimes with menacing 
illumination, the civilization and problems of our day. This is the advantage 
of studying a civilization in its total scope and life— that one may compare 
each stage or aspect of its career with a corresponding moment or element of 
our own cultural trajectory, and be warned or encouraged by the ancient 
aftermath of a modern phase. There, in the struggle of Roman civilization 
against barbarism within and without, is our own struggle; through Rome’s 
problems of biological and moral decadence signposts rise on our road today; 
the class war of the Gracchi against the Senate, of Marius against Sulla, of 
Caesar against Pompey, of Antony against Octavian, is the war that con- 
sumes our interludes of peace; and the desperate effort of the Mediterranean 
soul to maintain some freedom against a despotic state is an augury of our 
coming task. De nobis fabula narratur: of ourselves this Roman story is told. 


I wish to acknowledge the invaluable and self-sacrificing aid of Wallace 
Brockway at every step in the preparation of this book; the patience of my 
daughter, Mrs. David Easton, and of Miss Regina Sands, in typing 1200 
pages from my minuscule script; and above all to the affectionate toleration 
and protective guidance accorded me by my wife through many years of 
dull and plodding and happy scholarship. 



Table of Contents 


INTRODUCTION: ORIGINS 


Chapter I. Etruscan Prelude: 800-508 b.c, 


I. Italy 

3 

IV. Rome Under the Kings 

I I 

II. Etruscan Life 

5 

V. The Etruscan Domination ... 

.. 14 

III. Etruscan Art 

8 

VI. The Birth of the Republic ... 

• 15 


BOOK i: THE REPUBLIC: 508-30 b.c. 


Chronological Table 


Chapter II. The Struggle for Democracy: 508-264 b.c. 


I. Patricians and Plebs 

... 21 

3. The Beginnings of Roman 


II. The Constitution of the 


Law 

31 

Republic 

... 25 

4. The Army of the 


I . The Lawmakers 

... 25 

Republic 

33 

2. The Magistrates 

... 28 

III. The Conquest of Italy 

3 S 


Chapter III. Hannibal Against Rome: 264-202 b.c 

I. Carthage 39 

II. Regulus 43 IV. Hannibal 47 

III. Hamilcar 45 v. Scipio 51 


Chapter IV. Stoic Rome: 508-202 b.c. 


I. The Family 56 

II. The Religion of Rome 58 

1. The Gods 58 

2. The Priests 63 

3. Festivals 65 


4. Religion and Character .... 67 


III. Morals 67 

IV. Letters 72 

V. The Growth of the Soil 76 

VI. Industry 77 

VII. The City 8 1 

VIII. Post Mortem 83 


Chapter V. The Greek Conquest: 201-146 b.c, 


I. The Conquest of Greece 85 

n. The Transformation of 

Rome 87 

ni. The New Gods 93 


rv. The Coming of Philosophy.. 95 


V. The Awakening of 

Literature 

VI. Cato and the Conservative 

Opposition 

VII. Carthago Deleta 


97 

102 

105 



TABLE OF CONTENTS , 


BOOK II: THE REVOLUTION: 145-3° b.c. 

Chronological Table no 

Chapter VI. The Agrarian Revolt: 145-78 b.c 1 1 1 

I. The Background of 

Revolution in iv. Marius 117 

II. Tiberius Gracchus 113 v. The Revolt of Italy 120 

III. Caius Gracchus 115 vi. Sulla the Happy 122 

Chapter VII. The Oligarchic Reaction: 77-60 b.c 128 


I. The Government 

128 



11. The Millionaires 

130 

v. Spartacus 

136 

III. The New Womm 

'34 

VI. Pompey 

'38 

IV. Another Cato 

'35 

VII. Cicero and Catiline 

140 


Chapter VIII. Literature under the Revolution: 145-30 b.c... 146 

I. Lucretius 146 

ii. Be Rerum Natter a 149 rv. The Scholars 158 

III. Lesbia’s Lover 155 v. Cicero’s Pen 1 6 1 

Chapter IX. Caesar: 100-44 b.c 167 

I. The Rake 167 

II. The Consul 169 

III. .Morals and Politics 172 

IV. The Conquest of Gaul 174 


V. The Degradation of 


Democracy 178 

VI. Civil War 180 

VII. Caesar and Cleopatra 186 

VIII. The Statesman 190 

IX. Brutus 194 


Chapter X. Antony: 44-30 b.c 198 

I. Antony and Brutus 198 

II. Antony and Cleopatra 203 iii. Antony and Octavian 206 


BOOK III: THE PRINCIPATE: 30 B.C.-A.D. 192 

Chronological Table 

Chapter XI. Augustan Statesivlanship: 30 b.c.-a.d. 14 

I. The Road to Monarchy 2 1 1 iv. The Augustan Reformation.... 2 2 1 

n. The New Order 2 1 5 v. Augustus Himself 227 

in. Satiemia Regua 218 n. The Last Days of a God 229 

X 



TABLE OF CONTENTS 


Chapter XII. The Golden Age; 30 b.c.-a.d. 18 233 


I. The Augustan Stimulus 

233 

IV. Horace 

244 

II. Virgil 

235 

V. Livy 

250 

III. The Aeneid 

239 

VI. The Amorous Revolt 

252 

Chapter XIII. The Other Side 

OF Monarchy: a.d. 14-96... 

2 

I. Tiberius 

259 

V. The Three Emperors 

284 

11. Gaius 

265 

VI. Vespasian 

285 

III. Claudius 

268 

VII. Titus 

288 

IV. Nero 

274 

vni. Domitian 

289 

Chapter XIV. The Silver Age: 

: A.D. 14-96 

2 

I. The Dilettantes 

295 

V. Roman Science 

307 

II. Petronius 

296 

\a. Roman Medicine 

311 

III. The Philosophers 

299 

VII. Quintilian 

313 

IV. Seneca 

301 

viii. Statius and Martial 

....315 

Chapter XV. Rome at 

Work: 

A.D. 14-96 

3 

I. The Sowers 

319 

V. The Traders 

....328 

II. The Artisans 

321 

VI. The Bankers 

....330 

III. The Carriers 

323 

VII. The Classes 

....332 

IV. The Engineers 

326 

VIII. The Economy and the State..336 


Chapter XVI. Rome and Its Art: 30 b.c.-a.d. 96 


I. The Debt to Greece 

....338 


II. The Toilers’ Rome 

■■■339 

VII. Architecture 

III. The Homes of the Great .. 

•■•343 

I. Principles, Materials, and 

IV. The Arts of Decoration .. 

-345 

Forms 

V. Sculpture 

■■■347 

2. The Temples of Rome 

VI. Painting 

...351 

3. The Arcuate Revolution . 


•355 

■355 

■357 

■359 


338 


Chapter XVII. Epicurean Rome; 30 b.c.-a.d. 96 


363 


I. The People 363 

II. Education 367 

III. The Sexes 369 

IV. Dress 372 

V. A Roman Day 374 

Chapter XVIII. Roman Law; ; 

I. The Great Jurists 391 

II. The Sources of the Law 393 

in. The Law of Persons 394 


VI. A Roman Holiday 

1. The Stage 

2. Roman Music 

377 

377 

3. The Games 


vii. The New Faiths 

5 ^* 

388 

6 b.c.-a.d. 192 


IV. The Law of Property 

399 

V. The Law of Procedure .... 


VI. The Law of the Nations .. 

404 


391 


/ 


XI 



TABLE OF CONTENTS 


Chapter XIX. The Philosopher 


I. Nerva 407 

n. Trajan 408 

III. Hadrian 413 

I. The Ruler 413 


Kings: a.d. 96-180 407 

2. The Wanderer 417 

3. The Builder 420 

IV. Antoninus Pius 422 


V. The Philosopher as Emperor..425 


Chapter XX. Life and Thought in the Second Century: 


A.D. 96-192 

I. Tacitus 433 

II. Juvenal 437 

III. A Roman Gentleman 439 


433 

IV. The Cultural Decline 441 

V. The Emperor as Philosopher..443 

VI. Commodus 446 


BOOK IV: THE EMPIRE: 146 B.C.-A.D. 192 


Chronological Table 452 

Chapter XXI. Italy 453 

1. A Roster of Cities 453 

n. Pompeii 457 in. Municipal Life 460 


Chapter XXII. Civilizing the West 462 

I. Rome and the Provinces 462 iv. Gaul 470 

II. Africa 463 V. Britain 475 

m. Spain 468 vi. The Barbarians 478 


Chapter XXIII. Roman Greece 482 

I. Plutarch 482 iii. Epictetus 490 

II. Indian Summer 486 iv. Lucian and the Skeptics 494 


Chapter XXIV. The Hellenistic Revival 498 


I. Roman Egypt 498 

n. Philo 501 

III. The Progress of Science 502 

rv. Poets in the Desert 507 

V. The Syrians 510 


VI. Asia Minor 513 

tni. The Great Mithridates 516 

VIII. Prose 520 

IX. The Oriental Tide 522 


Chapter XXV. Rome and Judea: 132 b.c.-a.d. 135 


I. Parthia 528 

II. The Hasmoneans 530 v. The Great Expectation 

HI. Herod the Great 531 vi. The Rebellion 


IV. The Law and Its Prophets ....535 vii. The Dispersion 

xii 


528 


539 

542 

545 



TABLE OF CONTENTS 


BOOK V 

THE YOUTH OF CHRISTIANITY 

4 B.C.-A.D. 325 

Chronological Table 552 


Chapter XXVI. Jesus: 4 b.c.-a.d. 30 553 

I. The Sources 553 

II. The Growth of Jesus 557 iv. The Gospel 564 

III. The Mission 560 v. Death and Transfiguration... .570 


Chapter XXVII. The Apostles: a.d. 30-95 


I. Peter 575 

II. Paul 579 

1 . The Persecutor 579 

2. The Missionary 581 


3. The Theologian 

4. The Martyr 

III. John 


575 


.586 

,590 

,592 


Chapter XXVIII. The Growth of the Church: a.d. 96-305 596 

I. The Christians 596 iv. The Defenders of the Faith....6i i 

II. The Conflict of Creeds 603 v. The Organization of 

III. Plotinus 607 Authority 616 


Chapter XXIX. The Collapse of the Empire: a.d. 193-305 620 


I. A Semitic Dynasty 620 

II. Anarchy 627 

III. The Economic Decline 63 1 


IV. The Twilight of Paganism ....633 

V. The Oriental Monarchy 638 

VI. The Socialism of Diocletian. .641 


Chapter XXX. The Triumph of Christianity: a.d. 306-325 646 

I. The War of Church 

and State 646 iii. Constantine and Christianiw..655 

II. The Rise of Constantine 653 iv. Constantine and Civilization.. 66 1 


Epilogue: 665 

I. Why Rome Fell 665 ii. The Roman Achievement ....670 


673 

681 


Bibhography 

Notes 

Index 


XIU 


703 




List of Illustrations 


PAGE 

Fig. I. Caesar (black basalt) Frontispiece 

Fig. 2. An Etruscan Tomb at Cervetri i6 

Fig. 3. Head of a Woman from an Etruscan Tomb at Cometo 16 

Fig. 4. Apollo of Veil 17 

Fig. 5. The Orator 17 

Fig. 6. Pompey 192 

Fig. 7. Caesar 193 

Fig. 8. The Young Augustus 224 

Fig. 9. Augustus Imperator 225 

Fig. 10. Vespasian 288 

Fig. II. Relief from the Arch of Titus 289 

Fig. 12. The Roman Forum 336 

Fig. 13. Temple of Castor and Pollux 336 

Fig. 14. Two Roman Mosaics 336 

Fig. 15. The Gemma Augusta 336 

Fig. 16. An Arretine Vase 337 

Fig. 17. The Portland Vase 337 

Fig. 18. Frieze from the Altar of Peace 337 

Fig. 19. Frieze of Tellus from the Altar of Peace 337 

Fig. 20. Portrait of a Young Girl 368 

Fig. 21. “Clyde” 368 

Fig. 22. “Spring,” a Mural from Stabiae 368 

Fig. 23. Details of Mural from the House of the Vettii 368 

Fig. 24. Mural from the Villa Famesina 369 

Fig. 25. “Sappho” 369 

Fig. 26. The Colosseum 369 

Fig. 27. Interior of the Colosseum 369 

Fig. 28. Roman Soldier and Dacian, from the Column of Trajan 416 

Fig. 29. Antinoiis 416 

Fig. 30. Altar Found at Ostia 448 

Fig. 31. Arch of Trajan at Benevento 449 

Fig. 32. Ruins of Timgad 480 

Fig. 33. Pont du Gard at Nimes 481 


XV 



LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS 


PACE 

Fig. 34. Temple of luppiter Hellopolitanus at Baalbek 512 

Fig. 3 5. Temple of Venus or Bacchus at Baalbek 5 1 3 

Fig. 36. Arch of Septimius Severus, Rome 624 

Fig. 37. Reconstruction of Interior of Baths of Caracalla 624 

Fig. 38. Mithras and the Bull 625 

Fig. 39. Sarcophagus of the Empress Helena 625 

Maps of Ancient Rome and Ancient Italy and Sicily will be found on the 
inside covers. A map of the Roman Empire faces page 464. 


XVI 



INTRODUCTION 


ORIGINS 




CHAPTER I 


Etruscan Prelude 

800-508 B.C. 


I. ITALY 

S UIET hamlets in the mountain valleys, spacious pastures on the slopes, 
lakes upheld in the chalice of the hills, fields green or yellow verging 
toward blue seas, villages and towns drowsy under the noon sun and then 
alive with passion, cities in which, amid dust and dirt, everything from cot- 
tage to cathedral seems beautiful— this for two thousand years has been Italy. 
“Throughout the whole earth, and wherever the vault of heaven spreads, 
there is no country so fair”: thus even the prosaic elder Pliny spoke of his 
fatherland.^ “Here is eternal spring,” sang Virgil, “and summer even in 
months not her own. Twice in the year the cattle breed, twice the trees 
serve us with fruit.” ^ Twice a year the roses bloomed at Paestum, and in 
the north lay many a fertile plain like Mantua’s, “feeding the white swans 
with grassy stream.” ® Like a spine along the great peninsula ran the Apen- 
nines, shielding the west coast from the northeast winds, and blessing the soil 
with rivers that hurried to lose themselves in captivating bays. On the north 
the Alps stood guard; on every other side protecting waters lapped difficult 
and often precipitous shores. It was a land well suited to reward an industri- 
ous population, and strategically placed athwart the Mediterranean to rule 
the classic world. 

The mountains brought death as well as splendor, for earthquakes and 
eruptions now and then embalmed the labor of centuries in ashes. But here, 
as usually, death was a gift to life; the lava mingled with organic matter to 
enrich tfie earth for a hundred generations.^ Part of the terrain was too steep 
for cultivation, and part of it was malarial marsh; the rest was so fertile that 
Polybius marveled at the abundance and cheapness of food in ancient Italy,® 
and suggested that the quantity and quality of its crops might be judged from 
the vigor and courage of its men. Alfieri thought that the “man-plant” had 
flourished better in Italy than anywhere else.® Even today the timid student 
is a bit frightened by the intense feelings of these fascinating folk— their taut 
muscles, swift love and anger, smoldering or blazing eyes; the pride and fury 
that made Italy great, and tore her to pieces, in the days of Marius and Caesar 

3 



CAESAR AND CHRIST 


4 


(chap. I 


and the Renaissance, still run in Italian blood, only awaiting a good cause or 
argument. Nearly all the men are virile and handsome, nearly all the women 
beautiful, strong, and brave; what land can match the dynasty of genius that 
the mothers of Italy have poured forth through thirty centuries? No other 
country has been so long the hub of history— at first in government, then in 
religion, then in art. For seventeen hundred years, from Cato Censor to 
.Michelangelo, Rome was the center of the Western world. 


“Those who are the best judges in that country,” says Aristotle, “report 
that when Italus became king of Oenotria, the people changed their name, 
and called themselves no longer Oenotrians but Italians.” ^ Oenotria was 
the toe of the Italian boot, so teeming with grapes that the word meant “land 
of wine.” Italus, says Thucydides, was a king of the Sicels, Yfho had occupied . 
Oenotria on the way to conquer and name Sicily.® Just as the Romans called 
all Hellenes Graeci, Greeks, from a few Graii who had emigrated from north 
Attica to Naples, so the Greeks gradually extended the name Italia to all the 
peninsula south of the Po. 

Doubtless many chapters of Italy’s story lie silent under her crowded soil. 
Remains of an Old Stone Age culture indicate that for at least 30,000 years 
before Christ the plains were inhabited by man. Between 10,000 and 6000 
B.c. a neolithic culture appeared: a longheaded race called by ancient tradi- 
tion Liguri and Siceli fashioned rude pottery with linear ornament, made 
tools and weapons of polished stone, domesticated animals, hunted and 
fished, and buried their dead. Some lived in caves, others in round huts of 
wattle and daub; from these cylindrical cottages architecture pursued a 
continuous development to the round “House of Romulus” on the Palatine, 
the Temple of Vesta in the Forum, and the Mausoleum of Hadrian— the 
Castel Sant’ Angelo of today. 

About 2000 B.c. northern Italy was invaded— presumably not for the first 
time— by tribes from central Europe. They brought with them the custom of 
building their villages upon piles sunk in water, for safety from animal or 
human attack. They settled on Garda, Como, Maggiore, and the other en- 
chanted lakes that still lure aliens to Italy. Later they moved south and, find- 
ing fewer lakes, built their homes upon land, but still upon a foundation of 
piles. Their habit of surrounding these settlements with rampart and moat 
passed down to form features of Roman camps and medieval chateaux. 
They pastured flocks and herds, tilled the soil, wove clothing, fired pottery; 
and out of bronze, which had appeared in Italy toward the end of the Neo- 
lithic Age (about 2500 b.c.), they forged a hundred varieties of tools and 
weapons, including combs, hairpins, razors, tweezers, and other timeless im- 
plements.® They allowed their rubbish to accumulate so lavishly around the 



ETRUSCAN PRELUDE 


CHAP. l) 


5 


villages that their culture has received the name of terramare—&ax\^ marl— 
from the fertilizing potency of these remains. So far as we know, they were 
the direct ancestors of the basic population of Italy in historical times. 

In the valley of the Po the descendants of these terramaricoli, about looo 
B.C., learned from Germany the use of iron, made from it improved imple- 
ments, and, so armed, spread their “Villanovan” culture from its center at 
Villanova, near Bologna, far down into Italy. From them, we may believe, 
came the blood, languages, and essential arts of the Umbrians, Sabines, and 
Latins. Then, about 800 b.c., a new flood of immigrants arrived, subjugated 
the Villanovan population, and established between the Tiber and the Alps 
one of the strangest civilizations in the records of mankind. 


II. ETRUSCAN LIFE 

The Etruscans are among the irritating obscurities of history. They ruled 
Rome for a hundred years or more, and left upon Roman ways so varied an 
influence that Rome can hardly be understood without them; yet Roman 
literature is as mute concerning them as a matron anxious to forget, pub- 
hcly, the surrenders of her youth. Italian civilization, as literate provision, 
begins with them: 8000 inscriptions, as well as many works of art, mingle 
■with their remains; and there are indications of a lost literature in poetry, 
drama, and history.^^ But only a few unrevealing words of the language have 
been deciphered, and scholarship stands in deeper darkness today before 
the Etruscan mystery than that which shrouded the Egypt of the Pharaohs 
before Champollion. 

Consequently men still debate who the Etruscans were, and when and whence 
they came. Perhaps the old tradition has been too readily set aside; pedants love 
to disprove the accepted, which mischievously survives. Most Greek and Roman 
historians took it for granted that the Etruscans had come from Asia Minor.^^ 
Many elements in their religion, dress, and art suggest an Asiatic origin; many, 
again, seem natively Italian. Most likely the civilization of Etruria was an out- 
growth of the Villanovan culture, commercially influenced by Greece and the 
Near East, while the Etruscans themselves, as they believed, were invaders from 
Asia Minor, probably Lydia. In any case, their superior killin g power made 
them the ruling caste in Tuscany. 

We do not know where they landed; but we know that they founded, con- 
quered, or developed many cities— not mere villages of mud and straw as before 
them, but walled towns with geometrically laid-out streets, and houses not only 
of beaten earth, but often of baked brick or stone. Twelve of these communities 
joined in a loose Etruscan Eederation, dominated by Tarquinii (now Corneto), 



6 


CAESAR AND CHRIST 


(chap. I 

Arretium (Arezzo), Perusia (Perugia), and Veii (Isola Farnese).* Hardships of 
transportation through mountains and forests collaborated with the jealous 
pugnacity of men, here as in Greece, to form independent city-states, seldom 
united against external foes; each cherished its separate security, often stood 
aside while others were attacked, and, one after another, succumbed to Rome. 
But through most of the sixth century b.c. these allied municipalities constituted 
the strongest political force in Italy, with a well-organized army, a famous 
cavalry, and a powerful navy that for a time ruled what is still called the 
Tyrrhene (i.e., Etruscan) Sea.f 

As in the case of Rome, the government of the Etruscan cities began as a 
monarchy, became an oligarchy of “first families,” and gradually gave over to 
an assembly of propertied citizens the right of choosing the annual magistrates. 
So far as we can make out from the tomb paintings and reliefs, it was a thoroughly 
feudal society, with an aristocracy owning the soil and enjoying in luxury the 
surplus product of Villanovan serfs and war-won slaves. Under this discipline 
Tuscany was reclaimed from forest and swamp, and a system of rural irrigation 
and urban sewage was developed beyond anything discoverable in contemporary 
Greece. Etruscan engineers built drainage tunnels to take the overflow of lakes, 
and cut drained roadways through rock and lull.^^ As early as 700 b.c. Etruscan 
industry mined the copper of the western coast and the iron of Elba, smelted the 
iron ore at Populonia, and sold pig iron throughout Italy Etruscan merchants 
traded up and down the Tyrrhene Sea, brought amber, tin, lead, and iron from 
northern Europe down the Rhine and the Rhone and over the Alps, and sold 
Etruscan products in every major port of the Mediterranean. About 500 b.c. 
‘Itruscan towns issued their own coins. 

The people themselves are pictured on their tombs as short and stocky, with 
large heads, features almost Anatolian, complexion ruddy, especially in women; 
but rouge is as old as civilization.^^ The ladies were famous for their beauty,^® 
and the men sometimes had faces of refinement and nobility. Civilization had 
already advanced to a precarious height, for specimens of dental bridgework 
have been found in the graves; dentistry, like medicine and surgery, had been 
imported from Egypt and Greece.^^ Both sexes wore the hair long, and the men 
fondled beards. Garments followed the Ionian style: an inner shirt like the chiton, 
and an outer robe that became the Roman toga. Men as well as women loved 
ornament, and their tombs abounded in jewelry. 

If we may judge from the gay pictures of the sepulchers, the life of the 
Etruscans, like that of the Cretans, was hardened with combat, softened with 
luxury, and brightened with feasts and games. The men waged war lustily, and 
practiced a variety of virile sports. They hunted, fought bulls in the arena, and 


• The names given are Roman: the Etruscan names are unknown. 

t The Greeks called the Etruscans Tyrrheni or Tyrseni; the Romans called them Etntsci 
Qi Tusci. Possibly, like tyrant, the Greek name came from Tyrrha, a fortress in Lydia. Tower 
is probably a kindred word. 



CHAP.l) ETRUSCAN PRELUDE 7 

drove their chariots, sometimes four horses abreast, around a dangerous course. 
They threw the discus and the javelin, pole-vaulted, raced, wrestled, boxed, 
and fought in gladiatorial bouts. Cruelty marked these games, for the Etruscans, 
like the Romans, thought it dangerous to let civilization get too far from the 
brute. Less heroic persons brandished dumbbells, threw dice, played the flute, 
or danced. Scenes of bibulous merriment relieve the paintings in the tombs. 
Sometimes they are symposia for men only, with vinous conversation; now and 
then they show both sexes, richly dressed, reclining in pairs on elegant couches, 
eating and drinking, waited on by slaves, and entertained by dancers and 
musicians.^® Occasionally the meal is adorned with an amorous embrace. 

Probably the lady in this case was a courtesan, corresponding to the Greek 
hetaira. If we may believe the Romans, the young women of Etruria, like those 
of Greek Asia and Samurai Japan, were allowed to obtain dowries by prosti- 
tution; a character in Plautus accuses a girl of “seeking in the Tuscan way to 
earn her marriage by the shame of her body.”^*^ Nevertheless, women enjoyed 
a high status in Etruria, and the paintings represent them as prominent in every 
aspect of life. Relationship was traced through the mother in a manner sug- 
gesting again an Asiatic origin.-’^ Education was not confined to the male, for 
Tanaquil, wife of the first Tarquin, was versed in mathematics and medicine as 
well as political intrigue.^^ Theopompus ascribed a communism of women to the 
Etruscan,^® but no confirming evidence has come down to us of this Platonic 
utopia. Many of the pictures are scenes of marital concord and family life, with 
children romping about in happy ignorance. 

Religion provided every incentive to a negative morality. The Etruscan 
pantheon was fully equipped to terrify the growing ego and ease the tasks of 
parentage. The greatest of the gods was Tinia, who wielded the thunder and 
the lightning. About him, as a committee pitilessly carrying out his commands, 
were the Twelve Great Gods, so great that it was sacrilege (and we may there- 
fore neglect) to pronounce their names. Especially fearsome were Mantus and 
Mania, master and mistress of the Underworld, each with an executive horde of 
winged demons. Least appeasable of all was Lasa or Mean, goddess of fate, 
brandishing snakes or a sword, and armed with stylus and ink to write, and 
hammer and nails to affix, her unalterable decrees. Pleasanter were the Lares and 
Penates— Uttle statuettes kept on the hearth, and symbolizing the spirits of field 
and home. 

The sacred science of ascertaining the future by studying the livers of sheep 
or the flight of birds had probably come down to the Etruscans from Babylonia; 
but according to their own traditions it had been revealed to them by a divine 
boy, grandson of Tinia, who sprang to life from a furrow freshly turned, and 
at once spoke with the wisdom of a sage. Etruscan ritual culminated in the 
sacrifice of a sheep, a bull, or a man. Human victims were slaughtered or buried 
alive at the funerals of the great. In some cases prisoners of war were massacred 
as a propitiation of the gods; so the Phoceans taken at Alalia in 535 b.c. were 
stoned to death in the forum of Caere, and some 300 Romans captured in 358 b.c. 



CAESAR AND CHRIST 


8 


(chap. I 


were sacrificed at Tarquinii. The Etruscan appears to have believed that for 
every enemy slain he could secure the release of a soul from hell.^^ 

The behef in hell was the favorite feature of Etruscan theology. The dead 
spirit, as seen in the sepulchral representations, was conducted by genii to the 
tribunal of the Underworld, where in a Last Judgment it was given an oppor- 
tunity to defend its conduct in life. If it failed, it was condemned to a variety 
of torments that left their mark on Virgil (reared on Mantua’s Etruscan lore), 
on the early Christian conception of hell, and, through these and twenty cen- 
turies, on Tuscan Dante’s Inferno. From such damnation the good were spared, 
and the sufferings of the damned might be shortened by the prayers or sacrifices 
of their living friends. The saved soul passed from the Underworld to the society 
of the gods above, there to enjoy feasts, luxuries, and powers depicted hopefully 
on the tombs. 

Normally the Etruscans buried their dead. Those who could afford it were 
laid to rest in sarcophagi of terra cotta or stone, and the lid was topped with 
reclining figures carved partly in their likeness, partly in the smiling style of the 
archaic Greek Apollos; here, again, Etruscan traditions contributed to medieval 
art. Occasionally the dead were cremated and placed in cinerary urns, which 
also might be adorned with the figure of the deceased. In many cases the um 
or tomb simulated a house; sometimes the tomb, cut into the rock, was divided 
into rooms, and was equipped for post-mortem living with furniture, utensils, 
vases, clothing, weapons, mirrors, cosmetics, and gems. In a tomb at Caere the 
skeleton of a warrior lay on a perfectly preserved bed of bronze, with weapons 
and chariots beside it; and in a chamber behind his were the ornaments and 
jewelry of a woman presumably his wife. The dust that had been her beloved 
body was clothed in her bridal robes.^® 


in. ETRUSCAN ART 

Etruscan art is nearly all that we know of Etruscan history. We can trace in it 
the maimers and morals of the people, the power of religion and caste, and the 
changing tides of economic and cultural contact with Asia Minor, Egypt, 
Greece, and Rome. It was an art fettered bv ecclesiastical conventions and liber- 
ated by technical skill; it reflected a brutal and obscurantist civilization, but 
expressed it with character and force. Oriental influences— Ionic, Cypriot, 
Egyptian— dictated its earlier forms and styles, and Greek models dominated its 
later sculpture and pottery. In architecture and painting, however, in bronze 
statuary and the working of metals, Etruscan art spoke with its own voice and 
was unique. 

The architectural remains are never more than fragments or tombs. Parts of 
Etruria’s city walls still stand— heavy structures of imcemented masonry firmly 
and accurately joined. The homes of rich Etruscans defined the classic design 
of the Italian house: a deliberately forbidding external wall, a central atrium or 



CHAP.I) ETRUSCAN PRELUDE 9 

reception room, an opening in the roof of the atrium to let rain fall into a 
cistern below, and a circuit of small chambers surrounding the atrium and often 
faced by a colonnaded porch. Vitruvius has described Etruscan temples, and the 
tombs sometimes take their form. Essentially they followed Greek models; but 
the “Tuscan style” modified the Doric by leaving the column unfluted, giving 
it a base, and planning the cella on a six-to-five proportion of length to breadth, 
instead of the more graceful Attic relation of six-to-three. A cella of brick, a 
peristyle of stone, architraves and pediments of wood, reliefs and ornaments 
in terra cotta, the whole resting on a podium or elevation, and brightly painted 
outside and within: this was the Etruscan temple. For secular mass architecture 
—for city gates and walls, aqueducts and drains— the Etruscans (so far as we 
know) introduced the arch and vault to Italy. Apparently they had brought 
these majestic forms from Lydia, which had taken them from Babylonia.* But 
they did not follow up this brilliant method of covering great spaces without 
a confusion of columns and an oppressive weight of architraves. For the most 
part they walked in the grooves worn by the Greeks, and left Rome to con- 
summate the arcuate revolution. 

The most renowned of Etruria’s products is its pottery. Every museum 
abounds in it, setting the weary navigator of ceramic halls to wonder what 
unseen perfection exonerates these stores. Etruscan vases, when they are not 
clearly copies of Greek forms, are mediocre in design, crude in execution, 
barbarous in ornament. No other art has produced so many distortions of the 
human frame, so many hideous masks, uncouth animals, monstrous demons, and 
terrifying gods. But the black wares {bucchero nero) of the sixth century b.c. 
have an Italian vigor, and perhaps represent an indigenous development of 
Villanovan styles. Fine vases v'ere found at Vulci and Tarquinii— imported from 
Athens or imitated from black-figured Attic shapes. The Frangois Vase, a huge 
amphora discovered at Chiusi by a Frenchman of that name, was apparently the 
work of the Greek masters Clitias and Ergotimus. The later urns, red-figured on 
a black ground, are elegant, but again evidently of Greek manufacture; their 
abundance suggests that the Attic potters had captured the Etruscan market 
and driven the native workers into merely industrial production. All in all, the 
robbers were justified who, when they rifled Etruscan tombs, left so much of the 
pottery. 

We cannot speak of Etruscan bronzes with such reckless irreverence. The 
bronze casters of Etruria were at the top of their craft. They almost rivaled the 
potters in productivity; one city alone is reported to have had two thousand 
statues in bronze. What remains to us from their hands belongs mostly to the 
period of Roman domination. Among these reliefs two masterpieces stand out: 
the Orator who now holds forth, with Roman dignity and bronze restraint, in 
the Archeological Museum at Florence; and— also at Florence— the Chimera 
found at Arezzo in 1553, and pardy restored by Cellini. It is a disagreeable 

• They were used in Egyptian tombs and temples, and in the palaces of Nineveh. Some 
Roman arches are as old as anv that remain in Etruria.^s 



lO CAESAR AND CHRIST (CHAP. I 

figure, presumably the monster slain by Bellerophon— head and body of a lion, 
a serpent for a tail, a goat’s head growing anomalously out of the back; but its 
power and finish reconcile us to its biological extravagance. Etruscan bronze- 
workers produced, often for distant export, millions of statuettes, swords, hel- 
mets, cuirasses, spears, shields, utensils, urns, coins, locks, chains, fans, mirrors, 
beds, lamps, candelabra, even chariots. Greeting the visitor to the Metropolitan 
Museum of Art in New York is an Etruscan chariot: body and wheels of wood, 
sheathing and tires of bronze, the high front embossed with figures of consider- 
able grace. Many bronze objects were delicately engraved. The surface was 
coated with wax, the design was etched in with a stylus, the piece was dipped 
into acid, the wax-freed lines were burned into the metal, and then the wax 
was melted away. In the working of silver and gold, bone and ivory, the 
Etruscan artist was the heir and peer of the Egyptian and the Greek. 

Sculpture in stone was never popular in Etruria. Marble was scarce, and the 
quarries of Carrara were apparently unknown. Fine clays were at hand, how- 
ever, and soon took shape in a profusion of terra-cotta reliefs, statuettes, and 
sepulchral or architectural ornaments. About the end of the sixth century an 
unknown Etruscan artist established a school of sculpture at Veii, and carved 
the chef-d’oeuvre of Etruscan art— that Apollo of Veil which was found on 
the site in 1916, and until lately stood in the Villa Giulia at Rome. Modeled on 
the Ionian and Attic Apollos of the time, this engaging statue shows an almost 
feminine Mona Lisa face, with delicate smile, archly slanting eyes, and a body 
of health, beauty, and life; the Italians call it il Apollo che cammma~“t]\& 
Apollo that walks.” In this, and in many excellent figures on sarcophagi, Etruscan 
sculptors carried to perfection the Asiatic stylization of hair and drapery, while 
in the Orator they or their Roman heirs established a tradition of realistic 
portraiture. 

Etruscan painting collaborated with that of Greek Italy in transmitting another 
art to Rome. The elder Pliny described frescoes at Axdea “of older age than 
Rome itself”; and at Caere others of “still greater antiquity” and “supreme 
beauty.” The art used potter)^ and the interiors of homes and tombs, for its 
surfaces; only tomb frescoes and vase pictures remain, but in such quantity 
that every stage of Etruscan painting can be traced in them, from Oriental and 
Egyptian, through Greek and Alexandrian, to Roman and Pompeian styles. In 
some tombs we find the first Italian examples of windows, portals, columns, 
porticoes, and other architectural forms mimicked by painting on inner walls, 
in the very manner of Pompeii. Often the colors of these frescoes are faded; a 
few are astonishingly fresh and brilliant after more than a score of centuries. 
The technique is mediocre. In the earlier pictures there is no perspective, no 
foreshortening, no use of light and shade to give fullness and depth; the figures 
are Egyptianly slender, as if seen in a horizontally convex mirror; the faces are 
regularly in profile, wherever the feet may point. In the later examples perspec- 
tive and foreshortening appear, and the proportions of the body are represented 
with greater fidehty and skill. But in either case there is in these paintings a 



ETRUSCAN PRELUDE 


CHAP. l) 


H 


frolicsome and impish vivacity that makes one wonder how pleasant the life 
of the Etruscans must have been, if their tombs were so gay. 

Here are men in battle, and enjoying it; or they play at war in the jousts of 
the arena. They hunt the boar or lion with all the bravery of men who have or 
expect an audience; they box or wrestle in the palaestra, while the spectators 
dispute more violently than the combatants; they ride their horses, or drive their 
chariots, around the amphitheater; sometimes, resigned to peace, they fish. One 
pleasant scene shows a couple idly boating on a quiet stream: so old is wisdom. 
In a grave at Caere the pictured man and his lady recline on a couch; garlanded 
with laurel, he pledges her his eternal fidelity with a goblet of wine; she smiles 
and believes him, though she knows he lies. In other burial chambers the 
Etruscan painter sketches his idea of paradise: endless revelry, with careless 
lasses dancing wildly to double-pipes and the lyre. Pipes and lyres, trumpets 
and syrinxes, were apparently essential to every banquet, wedding, and funeral; 
love of music and the dance is one of the gracious aspects of Etruscan civiliza- 
tion. In the Tomb of the Lioness at Cometo the figures whirl about in nude 
and Bacchic frenzy.^® 


It was the natural destiny of the Etruscans to expand north and south, to 
extend their sway to the foothills of the Alps and the Greek cities of Cam- 
pania, and then to find themselves face to face, across the Tiber, with grow- 
ing Rome. They established colonies at Verona, Padua, Mantua, Parma, 
Modena, Bologna, and beyond the Apennines at Rimini, Ravenna, and 
Adria; from this modest Etruscan outpost the Adriatic took its name. They 
hemmed in Rome with Etruscan settlements at Fidenae, Praeneste (Pales- 
trina), and Capua, perhaps also at Cicero’s Tusculum (“little Tuscany”). 
Finally— in 6i8 b.c., according to a precise and precarious tradition— an 
Etruscan adventurer captured the throne of Rome; and for a century the 
Roman nation was ruled and formed by Etruscan civilization and power. 


IV. ROME UNDER THE KINGS 

About looo B.C. Villanovan migrants crossed the Tiber and settled in 
Latium. No one knows whether they conquered, or exterminated, or merely 
married the neolithic population they found there. Slowly the agricultural 
villages of this historic region between the Tiber and the Bay of Naples 
coalesced into a few jealously sovereign city-states, loath to unite except in 
annual religious festivals or occasional wars. The strongest w'-as Alba Longa, 
lying at the foot of Mt. Alban, probably where Castel Gandolfo now shelters 
the Pope on summer days. It was from Alba Longa, perhaps in the eighth 
century before Christ, that a colony of Latins— greedy for conquest, or 
driven by the pressure of the birth rate upon the land— moved some twenty 



12 


CAESAR AND CHRIST 


(chap. I 

miles to the northwest and founded the most famous of man’s habitations. 

This hazardously hypothetical paragraph contains all that history dares 
say about the origin of Rome. But Roman tradition was not so parsimonious. 
\^en the Gauls burned the city in 390 b . c . most historical records were pre- 
sumably destroyed, and thereafter patriotic fancy could paint a free picture ' 
of Rome’s birth. What we should call April 22, 753 b . c ., was given as the 
date, and events were reckoned A.U.C.—armo urbis condme—'va. the year 
from the city’s foundation.” A hundred tales and a thousand poems told how 
Aeneas, offspring of Aphrodite- Venus, had fled from burning Troy, and 
how, after suffering many lands and men, he had brought to Italy the gods or 
sacred effigies of Priam’s city. Aeneas had married Lavinia, daughter of the 
kin g of Latium; and eight generations later their descendant Numitor, said 
the story, held the throne of Alba Longa, Latium’s capital. A usurper, Amul- 
ius, expelled Numitor and, to end the line of Aeneas, killed Numitor’s sons 
and forced his only daughter, Rhea Silvia, to become a priestess of Vesta, 
vowed to virginity. But Rhea lay down by the banks of a stream and “opened 
her bosom to catch the breeze.” ^ Too trustful of gods and men, she fell 
asleep; Mars, overcome with her beauty, left her rich with twins. Amulius 
ordered these to be drowned. They were placed on a raft, which kind waves 
carried to the land; they were suckled by a she-wolf (lupa) or— said a skep- 
tical variant— by a shepherd’s wife, Acca Larentia, nicknamed Lupa be- 
cause, like a wolf’s, her love-making knew no law. When Romulus and 
Remus grew up they killed Amulius, restored Numitor, and went resolutely 
forth to build a kingdom for themselves on the hills of Rome. 

Archeology offers no confirmation to these stories of our youth; prob- 
ably they contain a core of truth. Perhaps the Latins sent a colony to develop 
Rome as a strategic moat against the expanding Etruscans. The site was 
twenty miles from the sea, and not well adapted to maritime commerce; but 
in those days of marauding pirates it was an advantage to be a bit inland. For 
internal trade Rome was well placed at the crossroads of traffic on the river 
and the land route between north and south. It was not a healthy location; 
rains, floods, and springs fed malarial marshes in the surrounding plain and 
even in the lower levels of the city; hence the popularity of the seven hills. 
The first of these to be settled, tradition said, was the Palatine, possibly 
because an island near its foot made easier there the fording and bridging of 
the Tiber. One by one the neighboring slopes were peopled, until the human 
overflow crossed the river and built upon the Vatican and Janiculum.* The 
three tribes— Latins, Sabines, and Etruscans— that dwelt on the hills joined in 

• There were more than seven of these modest elevations in Rome, and the “seven” varied 
from time to time. In Cicero’s day they were the Palatine, Capitohne, Caelian, Esquiline, 
Aventine, Viminal, and Quirinal. 




ETRUSCAN PRELUDE 


CHAP. l) 


13 


a federation, the Septimontium, and slowly merged into the city of Rome. 

The ancient story goes on to tell how Romulus, to secure wives for his 
settlers, arranged some public games and invited the Sabines and other tribes 
to attend. During the races the Romans seized the Sabine women and drove 
off the Sabine men. Titus Tatius, King of the Sabine Curites tribe, declared 
war and advanced upon Rome. Tarpeia, daughter of the Roman who had 
charge of a fortress on the Capitoline, opened a gate to the invaders. They 
crushed her with their shields in fair recompense; and later generations gave 
her name to that “Tarpeian Rock” from which condemned men were hurled 
to death. As the troops of Tatius neared the Palatine, the Sabine women, not 
insensitive to the compliment of capture, secured an armistice on the plea 
that they would lose their husbands if the Curites won, and their brothers or 
fathers if the Curites lost. Romulus persuaded Tatius to share the kingdom 
with him and join his tribe with the Latins in a common citizenship; there- 
after the freemen of Rome were called Curites or Quirites.^® There may again 
be some elements of truth in this wholesale romance— or perhaps it patrioti- 
cally concealed a Sabine conquest of Rome. 

After a long reign Romulus was hfted up to heaven in a whirlwind, there- 
after to be worshiped as Quirinus, one of Rome’s favorite gods. Tatius too 
having died, the heads of the more important famihes chose a Sabine, Numa 
Pompilius, as king. Probably the real power of government, between the 
foundation of the city and the Etruscan domination, was in the hands of 
these elders, or senator es, while the functions of the king, like those of the 
archon basileus in coeval Athens, were chiefly those of the highest priest.®^ 
Tradition pictured Numa as a Sabine Marcus Aurehus, at once philosopher 
and saint. “He strove,” says Livy, 

to inculcate fear of the gods as the most powerful influence that cotild 
act upon ... a barbarous people. But as this effort would fail to 
impress them without some claim to supernatural wisdom, he pre- 
tended that he had nocturnal interviews with the divine nymph 
Egeria; and that it was on her advice that he was instituting the 
religious ritual most acceptable to Heaven, and was appointing special 
priests for each major deity 


By establishing a uniform worship for the diverse tribes of Rome, Numa 
strengthened the unity and stability of the state;^® by interesting the bellicose 
Romans in religion, Cicero thought, Niuna gave his people forty years of 
neace.®^ 

His successor, Tullus Hostilius, restored to the Romans their normal life. 
“Convinced that the vigor of the state was becoming enfeebled through in- 
action, he looked around for a pretext for war.” He chose Rome’s mother 



CAESAR AND CHRIST 


14 


(chap. I 


city, Alba Longa, as an enemy, attacked it, and completely destroyed it. 
When the Alban king broke a promise of alliance, Tullus had him tied to 
two chariots and tom to pieces by driving the chariots in opposite direc- 
tions.®® His successor, Ancus Martius, agreed with his martial philosophy; 
Ancus understood, according to Dio Cassius, 


that it is not sufficient for men who wish to remain at peace to re- 
frain from wrongdoing . . . but the more one longs for peace the 
more vulnerable one becomes. He saw that a desire for quiet was not 
a power for protection unless accompanied by equipment for war; 
he perceived also that delight in freedom from foreign broils very 
quickly ruined men who were unduly enthusiastic over it.®^ 


V. THE ETRUSCAN DOMINATION 

About 655 B.C., proceeds the tradition, Demaratus, a rich merchant ban- 
ished from Corinth, came to live in Tarquinii, and married an Etrascan 
woman.®® His son Lucius Tarquinius migrated to Rome, rose to high position 
there, and, on the death of Ancus, either seized the throne or, more probably, 
was chosen to it by a coalition of Etruscan families in the city. “He was the 
first,” says Livy, “who canvassed for the crown, and delivered a set speech 
to secure the support of the plebs” ®®— i.e., those citizens who could not trace 
their ancestry to the founding fathers. Under this Tarquinius Priscus the 
monarchy increased its power over the aristocracy, and Etruscan influence 
grew in Roman politics, engineering, religion, and art. Tarquin fought suc- 
cessfully against the Sabines, and subjugated all Latium. He used the re- 
sources of Rome, we are told, to adorn Tarquinii and other Etrascan cities, 
but also he brought Etrascan and Greek artists to his capital and beautified it 
with majestic temples.* Apparently he represented the growing power of 
business and finance against the landed aristocracy. 

After a reign of thirty-eight years the first Tarquin was assassinated by the 
patricians, who aimed to limit the kingship again to a religious role. But 
Tarquin’s widow, Tanaquil, took charge of the situation and was able to 
transmit the throne to her son Servuus Tullius. Servius, says Cicero, was the 
first “to hold the royal power without being chosen by the people” i.e., 
by the leading families. He governed well, and built a protective moat and 
wall around Rome; but the great landowmers resented his rule and plotted to 
unseat him. Consequently he allied himself with the richer members of the 
plebs, and reorganized the army and the voters to strengthen his position. 


• Perhaps also he cleansed It with sewers. Roman historians ascribed to him the Cloaca 
Maxima, or Supreme Sewer; but some scholars reserve this honor for the second century b.c.40 



ETRUSCAN PRELUDE 


CHAP. l) 


*5 


Taking a census of persons and property, he classified the citizens according 
to wealth rather than birth, so that while leaving the old aristocracy intact, 
he raised up as a balance to it a class of equites, literally, horsemen— men who 
could equip themselves with horse {equus) and armor to serve in the cav- 
alry.* The census reported some 80,000 persons capable of bearing arms; 
reckoning one woman and one child for each soldier, and a slave for every 
fourth family, we may estimate at 260,000 the population of Rome and its 
subject environs about 560 s.c. Servius divided the people into thirty-five 
new tribes, arranging them according to place of residence rather than kin- 
ship or rank; thereby, hke Cleisthenes a generation later in Attica, he weak- 
ened the political cohesion and voting power of the aristocracy— the class 
that rated itself supreme by birth. When another Tarquin, grandson of 
Tarquinius Priscus, charged Servius with ruhng illegally, he submitted him- 
self to a plebiscite and received, says Livy, “a unanimous vote.” Uncon- 
vinced, Tarquin had Servius assassinated, and announced himself king.f 
Under Tarquinius Superbus (“the Proud”) the monarchy became abso- 
lute, and Etruscan influence supreme. The patricians had thought of the rex 
as the executive of the Senate and chief priest of the national religion; they 
could not long consent to unlimited royal power. Therefore they had killed 
Tarquinius Priscus and had raised no hand to protect Servius. But this new 
Tarquin was worse than the first. He surrounded himself with a bodyguard, 
degraded freemen with months of forced labor, had citizens crucified in the 
Forum, put to death many leaders of the upper classes, and ruled with an 
insolent brutality that won him the hatred of all influential men.^^ t Think- 
ing to gain popularity by successful wars, he attacked the Rutuli and the 
Volscians. While he was with the army the Senate assembled and deposed 
him (508 B.C.), in one of the great turning points of Roman history. 


VI. THE BIRTH OF THE REPUBLIC 

Here the tradition becomes literature, and the prose of politics is fused 
into the poetry of love. One evening (says Livy), in the King’s camp at 

* As originally applied to cavalrjTiien, the term could bear the traditional English mis- 
translation into knights; but equites soon lost this early sense, and came to mean the upper 
middle, or business, class. 

t Few smdents are inclined to follow the extreme skepticism of Ettore Pais, who rejects 
as legendary all Roman history before 443 b.c., and believes that the two Tarquins were one 
person, who never existed.^® A tentative and modified acceptance of the traditional story 
after Romulus appears to “account for the phenomena” better than any other hypothesis. 

JThe traditional account of the Tarquins is probably darkened by aristocratic and anti- 
Etruscan propaganda. The history of early Rome was written chiefly by representatives or 
admirers of the patrician class, just as the history of the emperors was later written by sena- 
torial partisans like Tacitus. 



i6 


CAESAR AND CHRIST 


(chap. 1 

^dea, his son, Sextus Tarquin, was debating with a relative, Lucius Tar- 
quinius Coliatinus, the comparative virtue of their wives. Collatinus pro- 
posed that they should take horse to Rome and surprise their ladies in the 
late hours of the night. They found the wife of Sextus feasting with intimates, 
but Lucretia, wife of Collatinus, was spinning wool for her husband’s cloth- 
ing. Sextus was inflamed with desire to try Lucretia’s fidelity and enjoy her 
love. A few days later he returned secretly to the home of Lucretia and 
overcame her by wile and force. Lucretia sent for her father and her hus- 
band, told them what had happened, and then stabbed herself to death. 
Thereupon Lucius Junius Brutus, a friend of Collatinus, called upon all good 
men to drive the Tarquins from Rome. He himself was a nephew of the 
King; but his father and his brother had been put to death by Tarquin, and 
he had gained his cognomen Brutus— i.e., idiot— by pretending lunacy so that 
he might be spared for his revenge. Now he rode with Collatinus to the 
capital, told Lucretia’s story to the Senate, and persuaded it to banish aU the 
royal family. The King had meanwhile left the army and hurried to Rome; 
Brutus, apprised of this, rode out to the army, told Lucretia’s story again, and 
won the soldiers’ support. Tarquin fled north, and appealed to Etruria to 
restore him to his throne.^® * 

An assembly of the citizen-soldiers was now convened; and instead of a 
king chosen for life it elected two consuls,t with equal and rival powers, to 
rule for a year. These first consuls, says the tradition, were Brutus and Col- 
latinus; but Collatinus resigned, and was replaced by Publius Valerius, who 
won the name Publicola— “friend of the people”— by putting through the 
Assembly several laws that remained basic in Rome: that any man who 
should try to make himself king might be killed without trial; that any at- 
tempt to take a pubHc office without the people’s consent should be punish- 
able with death; and that any citizen condemned by a magistrate to death or 
flogging should have the right of appeal to the Assembly. It was Valerius 
who inaugurated the custom whereby a consul, upon entering the Assembly, 
must part the axes from the rods and lower them as a sign of the people’s 
sovereignty and sole right, in peace, to impose a sentence of death. 

The revolution had two main results: it freed Rome from Etruscan as- 
cendancy and replaced the monarchy with an aristocracy that ruled Rome 
until Caesar. The political position of the poorer citizens was not improved; 
on the contrary, they were required to surrender the lands that Servius had 
given them, and they lost the modest measure of protection with which the 

• Most students since Niebuhr consign Lucretia to legend and Shakespeare. We do not 
know where history retires and poetry enters. Some have thought even Brutus to be legend;^® 
but here, again, skepticism has probably gone too far. 

t Or, says another tradition, two praetors or generals. 










Fig. y—The Orator 
Museo Archeologico, Florence 


ETRUSCAN PRELUDE 


CHAP. l) 


17 


monarchy had shielded them from aristocratic domination.^’^ The victors 
called the revolution a triumph of liberty; but now and then liberty, in the 
slogans of the strong, means freedom from restraint in the exploitation of 
the weak. 

The expulsion of the Tarquins from Rome, added to the defeat of the 
Etruscans by Greek colonists at Cumae in 524, threatened to end Etruscan 
leadership in central Italy. Responding for these reasons to Tarquin’s appeal, 
Lars Porsena, chief magistrate of Clusium, collected an army from the feder- 
ated cities of Etruria and advanced upon Rome. At the same time an attempt 
was made in Rome itself to restore Tarquin. The two sons of Brutus were 
among the arrested conspirators, and the fiery first consul provided an 
exemplar— perhaps a myth— for all later Romans when he witnessed in stoic 
silence the flogging and beheading of his children. The Romans destroyed 
the Tiber bridges before Porsena could reach them; it was in this defense of 
the bridgeheads that Horatius Codes immortalized himself in Latin and 
English lays. Despite this and other legends with which defeat tried to cover 
itself with glory, Rome surrendered to Porsena,^® and yielded portions of her 
territory to Veii and to the Latin towns that had been despoiled by Rome’s 
kings.^® Porsena showed his good taste by not demanding the restoration of 
Tarquin; in Etruria, too, by this time, aristocracy had driven out monarchy. 
Rome was weakened for a generation, but her revolution remained. 


The Etruscan power had been expelled, but the marks and relics of 
Etruscan influence were to survive in Roman civilization to its end. That 
influence was apparently least on the Latin language; nevertheless, the 
Roman numerals are probably Etruscan,®® and the name Roma may have 
come from the Etruscan ruvmn, river.®^ The Romans believed that they had 
taken from Etruria the ceremonies of a returning conqueror’s triumph, the 
purple-hemmed robes and ivory curule (chariotlike) seat of the magistrates, 
and the rods and axes carried before each consul by twelve lictors in token 
of his authority to strike and kill.®® * The coins of Rome, centuries before 
she had a fleet, were adorned with the prow of a ship— long used in the coinage 
of Etruria to symbolize her commercial activity and naval power. From the 
seventh to the foiurth centuries b.c. it was a custom among Roman aristocrats 
to send their sons to Etruscan cities for higher education; there, among other 

* In an Etruscan tomb at Vetulonia, dated back to the eighth century b.c., a double-headed 
iron ax was found, with its shaft enclosed by eight iron rods.53 The double ax as a symbol 
of government is at least as old as Alinoan Crete. The Romans gave to the bound rods and 
axes the name of jasces, bundles. The twelve lictors (ligare, to bind) owed their number to 
the twelve cities of the Etruscan Federation, each of which provided a lictor for the chief 
officer of the Federation.®* 



l8 CAESAR AND CHRIST (CHAP. I 

things, they learned geometry, surveying, and architecture.®® Roman dress 
derived from the Etruscan, or both from a common source. 

The first actors, and their name histriones, came to Rome from Etruria. 
It was Tarquinius Priscus, if we may beheve Livy, who built the first Circus 
Maximus, and imported race horses and pugilists from Etruria for Roman 
games. The Etruscans gave Rome brutal gladiatorial contests, but they also 
transmitted to Rome a higher status of woman than could be found in 
Greece. Etruscan engineers built the walls and sewers of Rome, and turned 
it from a swamp into a protected and civilized capital. From Etruria Rome 
took most of her reUgious ritual, her augurs, haruspices, and soothsayers; as 
late as Julian (a.d. 363). Etruscan soothsayers were an official part of every 
Roman army. With Etruscan rites Romulus was believed to have laid out 
the limits of Rome. From the same source came the Roman wedding cere- 
mony, with its symbolism of capture, and the Roman ceremonial funeral. 
Rome took her musical modes and instruments from Etruria.®® Most of her 
artists were Etruscans, and the Roman street where the artists worked was 
called Vicus Tuscus; the arts themselves, however, may have filtered in 
through Latium from the Campanian Greeks. Sculptural portraiture in 
Rome was deeply influenced by the death masks made for the family gal- 
lery— a custom taken from Etruria. Etruscan sculptors adorned the temples 
and palaces of Rome with bronze statuary and terra-cotta figures and reliefs; 
Etruscan architects bequeathed to Rome a “Tuscan style” that still survives 
in the colonnade of Sc. Peter’s Church; Etruscan kings at Rome seem to have 
built her first large edifices, and to have transformed Rome from an assem- 
blage of earthen or wooden huts into a city of wood, brick, and stone. Not 
till Caesar would Rome see again so much building as under Etruscan rule. 

We must not exaggerate. However much Rome learned from her neigh- 
bors, she remained, in all the basic features of hfe, distinctively herself. 
Nothing in Etruscan history quite suggests the Roman character, the grave 
self-discipline, the cruelty and courage, the patriotism and stoic devotion 
that patiently conquered, and then patiently ruled, the Mediterranean states. 
Now Rome was free, and the stage was cleared for the incomparable drama 
of the grandeur and decline of paganism in the ancient world. 



BOOK I 

THE REPUBLIC 

508-30 B.C. 



CHRONOLOGICAL TABLE 


B.C. 

8i 3(?): Foundation of Carthage 

558f: Carthage conquers western Sicily, 
Sardinia, Corsica, etc. 

509: Establishment of Roman Republic 
508: War with Etruscans; Horatius Co- 
des 

500: Hanno explores west coast of Africa 
494: First secession of the plebs; institu- 
tion of the tribunate 
492: Coriolanus (?) 

485: Condemnation of Spurius Cassius 
458,439: Cincinnatus, dictator 
451: First Decemvirate 
450: The Twelve Tables 
449: Second secession of the plebs 
445: Lex Caniilda on marriage 
443 : Institution of the censorship 
432: First law to check electoral corrup- 
tion 

396: Romans capture Veii 
390: Sack of Rome by the Gauls 
367: Lex Licinia alleviates law of debt 
343-341: First Samnite War 
340-338: War with the Latins; dissolution of 
the Latin League 

339: Leges Fiibliliae end veto power of 
Senate 

327-304: Second Samnite War 

326: Lex Foetelia alleviates law of debt 
321: Romans defeated at Caudine Forks 
312: Censorship of .Appius Claudius; be- 
ginning of i' ppian Way 
300: Lex Valeria on right of appeal: lex 
Ogidnia on eligibility to priest- 
hood 

298-290: Third Samnite War 

287: Final secession of the plebs; leges 
Hortensiae on powers of the As- 
sembly 

283: Rome occupies most of Greek Italy 
280-275: Pyrrhus in Italy and Sicily 
280-279: “P^nrhic victories” at Heraclea and 
Asculum 

272: Rome takes Tarentum 
264-241: First Punic War 

248: Hamilcar Barca invades Sicily 
241: Carthagini''n defeated off Ae- 
gadian Isles; Sicily a Roman prov- 
ince 


B.C. 

241-236: War of Mercenaries vs. Carthage 
240: First play of Livius Andronicus 
239: Carthage yields Sardinia and Cor- 
sica to Rome 
237: Hamilcar in Spain 
235: Naevius’ first play 
230: War on the Illyrian pirates 
222: Rome takes Cisalpine Gaul 
221: Hannibal commander in Spain 
219-201: Second Punic War 

218: Hannibal crosses the Alps and de- 
feats Romans at the Ticinus and 
the Trebia 

217: Hannibal defeats Romans at Lake 
Trasimene; Fabius Maximus dic- 
tator 

216: Hannibal victorious at Cannae 
215: Treaty between Hannibal and 
Philip V 
214: FI. Plautus 

214-205: First Macedonian War 
212: Romans capture Syracuse 
210-209: Scipio Africanus Major in Spain 
207: Hasdrubal defeated at the Metaurus 
203: Hannibal recalled to Africa 
202: Scipio defeats Hannibal at Zama; 
Quintus Fabius Pictor publishes 
first history of Rome 
201: Spain a Roman province 
200-197: Second /Macedonian War 
199: FI. Ennius 
189: Battle of Magnesia 
186: Suppression of the worship of Bac- 
chus^ 

184: Censorship of Cato the Elder 
171-168: Third Macedonian War 
168: Battle of Pydna 
167: Polybius in Rome 
160: The Adelphi of Terence 
155: Cameades lectures in Rome 
155-138: War with the Lusitanians 
150-146: Third Punic War 
147-140: Successes of Viriathus against Rome 
in Spain 

146: Scipio Africanus Minor destroys 
Carthage; Mummius sacks Cor- 
inth; extension of Roman rule over 
north Africa and Greece 



CHAPTER II 


The Struggle for Democracy 

508-264 B.C. 


I. PATRICIANS AND PEERS 

W HO were the patricians? Livy * thought that Romulus had chosen 
a hundred clan heads of his tribe to help him establish Rome and be 
his council or senate. These men were later called parrer— “fathers”— and 
their descendants “derived from the fathers.” Modem theory, which 

lives by nibbling at tradition, likes to explain the patricians as alien con- 
querors, perhaps Sabines, who invaded Latium and thereafter ruled the 
Latin plebs, or populace, as a lower caste. We may believe that they were 
composed of clans that through economic or military superiority had ac- 
quired the best lands, and had transformed their agricultural leadership into 
political mastery. These victorious clans— the Manlii, Valerii, Aemilii, Cor- 
nelii, Fabii, Horatii, Claudii, Julii, etc.— continued for five centuries to give 
Rome generals, consuls, and laws. When the three original tribes united, their 
clan heads made a senate of some three hundred members. They were not 
such lords oi comfort and luxury as their descendants; often they put their 
own hands to the ax or the plow, lived vigorously on simple fare, and wore 
clothing spun in their homes. The plebs admired them even when it fought 
them, and applied to almost anything appertaining to them the term classicus, 
“classical”— i.e., of the highest rank or class.” 

Close to them in wealth, but far below them in political power, were the 
eqiiites, or businessmen. Some were rich enough to win their way into the 
•Senate, and formed there the second part of its constituent patres {et) con- 
scripti—i.e., “patricians and coinscribed men.” These two classes were called 
the “orders,” and were termed boni, “the good”; for early civilizations 
thought of virtue in terms of rank, ability, and power; virtiis to the Roman 
meant manliness, the qualities that make a man (vir) . Populus, “people,” 
took in only these upper classes; and originally it was in this sense that those 
famous initials were used-S P Q R (Senatns Popuhisque Roimnus) —which 
were to mark so proudly a hundred thousand monuments.^ Gradually, as 
democracy fought its way, the word populus came to include the plebs. 
This was the main body of Roman citizens. Some were artisans or trades- 

21 



22 


CAESAR AND CHRIST 


(chap. 11 


men, some were freedmen, many were peasants; perhaps, in the beginning, 
they were the conquered natives of the city’s hills. Some were attached as 
clientes, or dependents, to an upper-class pair onus; in return for land and 
protection they helped him in peace, served under him in war, and voted in 
the assemblies as he told them. 

Lowest of all were the slaves. Under the kings they had been costly and 
few, and therefore had been treated with consideration as valuable members 
of the family. In the sixth century b.c., when Rome began her career of con- 
quest, war captives were sold in rising number to the aristocracy, the busi- 
ness classes, and even to plebeians; and the status of the slave sank. Legally 
he could be dealt with as any other piece of property; in theory, and accord- 
ing to the custom of the ancients, his life had been forfeited by defeat, and 
his enslavement was a merciful commutation of his death. Sometimes he man- 
aged his master’s property, business, or funds; sometimes he became a teacher, 
writer, actor, craftsman, laborer, tradesman, or artist, and paid his master 
part of his earmngs. In this or other ways he might earn enough to buy his 
freedom and become a member of the plebs. 

Contentment is as rare among men as it is natural among animals, and no 
form of government has ever satisfied its subjects. In this system the business- 
men were piqued by their e.xclusion from the Senate, the richer plebeians by 
their exclusion from the equites; and the poorer plebeians resented their 
poverty, their political disabilities, and their liability to enslavement for 
debt. The law of the early Republic allowed a creditor to imprison a per- 
sistently defaulting debtor in a private dungeon, to sell him into slavery, 
even to kill him. Joint creditors might, said the law, cut up the corpse of the 
defaulting debtor and divide it among them— a provision apparently never 
enforced.'^ The plebs demanded that these laws should be repealed and the 
burden of accrued debt reduced; that the lands won in war and owned by the 
state should be distributed among the poor instead of being given, or sold at 
nominal prices, to the rich; that plebeians should be eligible to the magis- 
tracies and the priesthoods, be permitted to intermarry with the “orders,” 
and have a representative of their class among the highest officials of the gov- 
ernment. The Senate sought to frustrate the agitation by fomenting wars, 
but it was shocked to find its calls to the colors ignored. In 494 b.c. large 
masses of the plebs “seceded” to the Sacred Mount on the river Anio, three 
miles from the city, and declared that they would neither fight nor work for 
Rome until their demands had been met. The Senate used every diplomatic 
or religious device to lure the rebels back; then, fearing that invasion from 
without might soon be added to re\ olt within, it agreed to a cancellation or 
reduction of debts, and the estaolishment of two tribunes and three aediles 
as the elected defenders of the plebs. The plebs returned, but only after tak- 



CHAP.Il) the struggle FOR DEMOCRACY 23 

ing a solemn oath to kill any man who should ever lay violent hands upon 
their representatives in the government.® 

This was the opening battle in a class war that ended only with the Re- 
public that it destroyed. In 486 the consul Spurius Cassius proposed an allot- 
ment of captured lands among the poor; the patricians accused him of 
currying popular favor with a view to making himself king, and had him 
killed; this was probably not the first in a long line of agrarian proposals 
and Senatorial assassinations, culminating in the Gracchi and Caesar. In 
439 Spurius Maelius, who during a famine had distributed wheat to the poor 
at a low price or free, was slain in his home by an emissary of the Senate, 
again on the charge of plotting to be king.® In 3 84 Marcus Manlius, who had 
heroically defended Rome against the Gauls, was put to death on the same 
charge after he had spent his fortune relieving insolvent debtors. 

The next step in the climb of the plebs was a demand for definite, written, 
and secular laws. Heretofore the patrician priests had been the recorders and 
interpreters of the statutes, had kept their records secret, and had used their 
monopoly, and the ritual requirements of the law, as weapons against social 
change. After a long resistance to the new demands, the Senate (454) sent a 
commission of three patricians to Greece to study and report on the legisla- 
tion of Solon and other lawmakers. When they returned, the Assembly 
(45 1 ) chose ten mtn— dec e?mnri—X(i formulate a new code, and gave them 
supreme governmental power in Rome for two years. This commission, 
under the presidency of a resolute reactionary, Appius Claudius, trans- 
formed the old customary law of Rome into the famous Twelve Tables, 
submitted them to the Assembly (which passed them with some changes) , 
and displayed them in the Forum for all who would— and could— to read. 
This seemingly trivial event was epochal in Roman history and in the history 
of mankind; it was the first written form of that legal structure which was 
to be Rome’s most signal achievement and her greatest contribution to 
civilization. 

When the second year of the cominission’s tenure ended, it refused to restore 
the government to the consuls and tribunes, and continued to exercise supreme 
—and ever more irresponsible— authority. Appius Claudius, says a story suspi- 
ciously like Lucretia’s, was stirred with a passion for the beautiful plebeian 
Virginia, and, to secure her for his pleasure, had her declared a slave. Her 
father, Lucius Virginius, protested; and when Claudius refused to hear him 
he slew his daughter, rushed out to his legion, and asked its aid in overthrowing 
the new despot. The enraged plebs once more “seceded” to the Sacred Mount, 
“imitating,” says Livy, “the moderation of their fathers by abstaining from 
all injury.” Learning that the army was supporting the plebs, the patricians 
gathered in the senate house, deposed the Decemvirs, banished Claudius, restored 



CAESAR AND CHRIST 


H 


(chap. II 


the consulate, enlarged the tribunate, recognized the inviolability of the people’s 
tribunes, and confirmed to the plebs the right of appealing to the Assembly of 
the Centuries from the decision of any magistrate.® Four years later (445) the 
tribune Caius Canuleius moved that the plebs should have the right of inter- 
marriage with patricians, and that plebeians should be eligible to the consulate. 
The Senate, again faced by threats of war from vengeful neighbors, yielded the 
first point, and averted the second by agreeing that thereafter six of the tribunes 
chosen by the Centurial Assembly should have the authority of consuls. The 
plebs responded handsomely by choosing all these tribuni mlitim consulari 
potestate from the patrician class. 

The long war with Veii (405-396), and the assault of the Gauls upon Rome, 
unified the nation for a time, and stilled internal strife. But victory and disaster 
alike left the plebeians destitute. While they fought for their country their 
lands were neglected or ravaged, and the interest on their debts mounted beyond 
possible repayment. The lenders took no excuse, but demanded principal and 
interest, or the imprisonment and enslavement of the borrowers. In 376 the 
tribunes Licinius and Sextius proposed that interest already paid should be 
deducted from the principal, the balance to be met in three years; that no man 
should be allowed to own more than five hundred iugera (about three hundred 
acres) of land, or to use on them more than a certain proportion of slaves to 
free laborers; and that one of the two consuls should regularly be chosen from 
the plebs. For a decade the patricians resisted these proposals; meanwhile, says 
Dio Cassius, “they stirred up war after war, that the people might be too 
occupied to agitate about the land.’’ ® At last, threatened with a third secession, 
the Senate accepted the “Licinian laws,” and Camillus, leader of the conservatives, 
celebrated the reconciliation of the classes by building a stately Temple of 
Concord in the Forum. 

It was a major step in the grOAVth of Rome’s limited democracy. From that 
moment the plebs progressed rapidly towards a formal equality with the “orders” 
in politics and law. In 356 a plebeian was made dictator for a year; in 351 the 
censorship, in 337 the praetorship, and in 300 the priesthoods were opened to 
the plebs. Finally (287) the Senate agreed that the decisions of the Tribal 
Assembly should also have the force of law, even when contrary to the resolu- 
tions of the Senate. Since in this Assembly the patricians could easily be out- 
voted by the plebs, this lex Hortensia was the capstone and triumph of Roman 
democracy. 

Nevertheless, the power of the Senate soon recovered after these defeats. The 
demand for land was quieted by sending Romans as colonists to conquered sod. 
The cost of winning and holding office— w hich was unpaid— automatically dis- 
qualified the poor. The richer plebeians, having secured political equalitv" and 
opportunity, now co-operated with the patricians in checking radical legisla- 
tion; the poorer plebeians, shorn of financial means, ceased for two centuries 
to play a significant role in the affairs of Rome. Businessmen fell in with patrician 
policy because it gave them contracts for public works, openings for colonial 



CHAP.Il) the struggle FOR DEMOCRACY 25 

and provincial exploitation, and commissions to collect taxes for the state. The 
Assembly of the Centuries, whose method of voting gave the aristocracy full 
control, continued to choose the magistrates, and therefore the Senate. The 
tribunes, dependent upon the support of rich plebeians, used their office as a con- 
servative force. Every consul, even if chosen by the plebs, became by contagion 
a zealous conservative when, at the close of his year of office, he was received 
into the Senate for life. The Senate took the initiative in legislation, and custom 
sanctioned its authority far beyond the letter of the law. As foreign affairs 
became more important, the Senate’s firm administration of them raised its 
prestige and power. When, in 264, Rome entered upon a century of war with 
Carthage for the mastery of the Mediterranean, it was the Senate that led the 
nation through every trial to victory; and an imperiled and desperate people 
yielded without protest to its leadership and domination. 


II. THE CONSTITUTION OF THE REPUBLIC 

1. The Lawmakers 

Let us try to picture to ourselves this complex state, so formed after five 
centuries of development. By common consent it was one of the ablest and 
most successful governments that the world has yet seen; Polybius, indeed, 
considered it an almost literal realization of Aristotle’s ideal constitution. 
It provided the framework, sometimes the battleground, of Roman history. 

Who, among this people, were the citizens? Technically, those who had 
been bom or adopted into one of the three original tribes of Rome. In prac- 
tice this meant all males above fifteen years of age who were neither slaves 
nor aliens, and all aliens who had received a grant of Roman citizenship. 
Never before or since has citizenship been so jealously guarded or so highly 
prized. It meant membership in the relatively small group that was soon to 
rale the whole Mediterranean area; it brought immunity from legal torture 
or duress, and the right of appeal from any official in the Empire to the 
Assembly— or, later, the emperor— at Rome. 

Obligations went with these privileges. The citizen, unless quite poor, 
was liable to military service at call from his sixteenth to his sixtieth year; 
and he could not hold political office until he had served ten years in the 
army. His political rights were so bound up with his military duties that his 
most important voting was done as a member of his regiment, or “century.” 
In the days of the kings he had voted also in the comitia curiata; i.e., he and 
other heads of families had come together {ciim-ire) in a gathering of the 
thirty curiae, or wards, into which the three tribes had been divided; and to 
the end of the Republic it was this Curial Assembly that conferred upon the 



26 


CAESAR AND CHRIST 


(chap. II 

elected magistrates the hnperium, or authority to govern. After the fall of 
the monarchy the Curial Assembly rapidly lost its other powers to the 
comtia centiiriata—xhe soldiers assembled in “centuries” originally of one 
hundred men. It was this Centurial Assembly that chose the magistrates, 
passed or rejected the measures proposed to it by officials or the Senate, heard 
appeals from the judgments of magistrates, tried all cases of capital crime 
charged to Roman citizens, and decided upon war or peace. It was the broad 
base of both the Roman army and the Roman government. Nevertheless, its 
powers were narrowly constrained. It could convene only at the call of a 
consul or a tribune. It could vote only upon such measures as were presented 
to it by the magistrates or the Senate. It could not discuss or amend these pro- 
posals; it could only vote Yes or No. 

The conservative character of its decisions was guaranteed by the class 
arrangement of its members. At the top were eighteen centuries of patricians 
and businessmen (eqiiites). Then came the “first class”— men owning 100,000 
asses’ worth of property;* these had eighty centuries, or 8000 men, in the 
Assembly. The second class embraced citizens owning between 75,000 and 

100.000 asses; the third, between 50,000 and 75,000 asses; the fourth, between 

25.000 and 50,000 asses; and each of these classes had twenty centuries. The fifth 
class included citizens owning between 11,000 and 25,000 asses, and had thirty 
centuries. All citizens possessing under 11,000 asses were formed into one 
century. Each century cast one vote, determined by a majority of its members; 
a small majority in one century could cancel a large majority in another, and 
give the victory to a numerical minority. Since each century voted in the order 
of its financial rank, and its vote was announced as soon as taken, the agreement 
of the first two groups gave at once ninety-eight votes, a majority of the whole, 
so that the lower classes seldom voted at all. Voting was direct; citizens who 
could not come to Rome for the meeting had no representation in the Assembly. 
All this was no mere device to disfranchise the peasants and the plebs. The 
classification of centuries had been made by the census to distinguish men for 
taxation as well as for war; the Romans thought it just that the right to vote 
should be proportioned to taxes paid and military duties required. Citizens with 
less than 11,000 asses of property had altogether only one centurial vote; but 
correspondingly they paid a negligible tax and were in normal times exempt 
from military service.^^ Of the proletariat, till Marius’ day, nothing was asked 
except prolific parentage. Despite some later changes, the Centurial Assembly 
remained a frankly conservative and aristocratic institution. 

Doubtless as an offset to this, the plebs had from the beginning of the Re- 
public held its own assemblies, the concilia plebis. Out of these councils, prob- 
ably, came the comitia popiili tributa which we find exercising legislative power 

* An as would now be equivalent in purchasing power to approximately six cents of United 
States currency in 1942. Ci. p. 78. 



CHAP. Il) the struggle FOR DEMOCRACY 27 

as early as 357 b.c. In this Tribal Assembly of the People the voters were ar- 
ranged according to tribe and residence, on the basis of the Servian census; each 
tribe had one vote, and the rich counted for no more than the poor. After the 
recognition of its legislative authority by the Senate in 287, the power of the 
Tribal Assembly grew until by 200 it had become the chief source of private 
law in Rome. It chose the tribunes (i.e., tribal representatives) of the people 
{tribuni pie bis) as distinct from the tribimi militares elected by the centuries. 
Here, too, however, there was no discussion by the people; a magistrate pro- 
posed a law and defended it, another magistrate might speak against it; the 
Assembly listened, and voted Yes or No. Though by its constitution it was more 
progressive than the Centurial Assembly, it was far from radical. Thirty-one of 
its thirty-five tribes were rural, and their members, mostly owners of land, 
were cautious men. The urban proletariat, confined to four tribes, was politically 
powerless before Marius, and after Caesar. 

The Senate remained supreme. Its original membership of clan heads was 
recruited by the regular admission of ex-consuls and ex-censors, and the 
censors were authorized to keep its numbers up to 300 by nominating to it 
men of patrician or equestrian rank. Membership was for life, but the Senate 
or a censor could dismiss any member detected in crime or serious moral 
offense. The august body convened at the call of any major magistrate in 
the curia, or senate house, facing the Forum. By a pleasant custom the mem- 
bers brought their sons with them to attend in silence, and to learn statesman- 
ship and chicanery at first hand. Theoretically the Senate might discuss and 
decide only such issues as were presented to it by a magistrate, and its deci- 
sions were merely advice {senatus consulta), without the force of law. 
Actually its prestige was so great that the magistrates nearly always accepted 
its recoirunendations, and seldom submitted to the assemblies any measure 
not already sanctioned by the Senate. Its decisions were subject to veto by 
any tribune, and a defeated minority of the Senate might appeal to the 
assembhes;^- but these procedures were rare except in revolution. The 
magistrates held power for a year only, while the senators were chosen for 
life; inevitably this deathless monarch dominated the bearers of a brief 
authority. The conduct of foreign relations, the making of alliances and 
treaties, the waging of war, the government of the colonies and provinces, 
the management and distribution of the pubhc lands, the control of the 
treasury and its disbursements— all these were exclusive functions of the 
Senate, and gave it immense power. It was legislature, executive, and judici- 
ary in one. It acted as judge in crimes hke treason, conspiracy, or assassina- 
tion, and appointed from its membership the judges in most major civil trials. 
When a crisis came it could issue its most formidable decree, the senatus- 
consultum ulthmim, “that the consuls should see to it that no harm should 



CAESAR AND CHRIST 


28 


(chap, n 


come to the state”— a decree that established martial law and gave the consuls 
absolute command of all persons and property. 

The Senate of the Republic * often abused its authority, defended cor- 
rupt officials, waged war ruthlessly, exploited conquered provinces greedily, 
and suppressed the aspirations of the people for a larger share in the pros- 
perity of Rome. But never elsewhere, except from Trajan to Aurelius, have 
so much energy, wisdom, and skill been applied to statesmanship; and never 
elsewhere has the idea of service to the state so dominated a government or 
a people. These senators were not supermen; they made serious mistakes, 
sometimes vacillated in their policies, often lost the vision of empire in the 
lust for personal gain. But most of them had been magistrates, administrators, 
and commanders; some of them, as proconsuls, had ruled provinces as large 
as kingdoms; many of them came of families that had given statesmen or 
generals to Rome for hundreds of years; it was impossible that a body made 
up of such men should escape some measure of excellence. The Senate was 
at its worst in victory, at its best in defeat. It could carry forward policies 
that spanned generations and centuries; it could begin a war in 264 and end 
it in 146 B.c. When Cineas, the philosopher who had come to Rome as envoy 
of Pyrrhus (280), had heard the Senate’s deliberations and observed its men, 
he reported to the new Alexander that here was no mere gathering of venal 
politicians, no haphazard council of mediocre minds, but in dignity and 
statesmanship veritably “an assemblage of kings.” 


2. The Magistrates 

The major officials were elected by the Centurial, the minor by the Tribal, 
Assembly. Each office was held by a collegium of two or more colleagues, 
equal in power. All offices except the censorship ran for only a year. The 
same office could be held by the same person only once in ten years; a year 
had to elapse between leaving one office and taking another; and in the 
interval the ex-official could be prosecuted for malfeasance. The aspirant to 
a political career, if he survived a decade in the army, might seek election as 
one of the quaestors who, under the Senate and the consuls, managed the 
expenditure of state funds, and assisted the praetors in preventing and in- 
vestigating crime. If he ple:.sed his electors or his influential supporters, he 
might later be chosen one of the four aediles charged with the care of build- 
ings, aqueducts, streets, markets, theaters, brothels, saloons, police courts, 

* The term respublica (the public property, or commonwealth) was applied by the Romans 
to all three forms of their state— monarchy, “democracy,” and principate; historians now agree 
in limiting it to the period between 508 and 49 B.c. 



CHAP.Il) THE STRUGGLE FOR DEMOCRACY 29 

and public games. If again successful, he might be made one of the four 
praetors who in war led armies, and in peace acted as judges and interpreters 
of the law.* 

At about this point in the cursiis honoruvt, or sequence of offices, the 
citizen who had made a name for integrity and judgment might become one 
of the two censors (“valuators”) chosen every fifth year by the Centurial 
Assembly. One of them would take the quinquennial census of the citizens, 
and assess their property for political and military status and for taxation. 
The censors were required to examine the character and record of every 
candidate for office; they watched over the honor of women, the education 
of children, the treatment of slaves, the collection or farming of taxes, the 
construction of public buildings, the letting of governmental property or 
contracts, and the proper cultivation of the land. They could lower the rank 
of any citizen, or remove any member of the Senate, whom they found 
guilty of immorality or crime; and in this function the power of either censor 
was immune to the veto of the other. They could try to check extravagance 
by raising taxes on luxuries. They prepared and published a budget of state 
expenditures on a five-year plan. At the close of their eighteen-month term 
they would gather the citizens together in a solemn ceremony of national 
purification {lustrum)^ as a means of maintaining cordial relations with the 
gods. Appius Claudius Caecus (the Blind), great-grandson of the Decemvir, 
was the first to make the censorship rival the consulate in dignity. During his 
term (312) he built the Appian Aqueduct and the Appian Way, promoted 
rich plebeians to the Senate, reformed land laws and state finances, helped 
to break down the priestly and patrician monopoly and manipulation of the 
law, left his mark on Roman grammar, rhetoric, and poetry, and, by his 
deathbed speech against Pyrrhus, decided the Roman conquest of Italy. 

Theoretically one of the two consuls (“consultants”) had to be a plebeian; 
actually very few plebeians were chosen, for even the plebs preferred men 
of education and training for an office that would have to deal with every 
executive phase of peace and war throughout the Alediterranean. On the 
eve of the election the magistrate in charge of it observed the stars to see 
if they favored the presentation of the several candidates’ names; presiding 
over the Centurial Assembly on the morrow, he might offer to its choice 
only those names that the auspices had approved; “ in this way the aris- 
tocracy discouraged “upstarts” and demagogues, and in most cases the 
Assembly, awed or intimidated, submitted to the pious fraud. The candidate 
appeared in person, dressed in a plain white {cavdidus) toga to emphasize 

* Quaestor from quaerere, to inquire— hence a trial was a qtiaestio; aedile from aedes, build- 
ing; praetor from prae-ire, to go in advance, to lead— hence the cohort that watched over him 
was called the Praetorian Guard. 



CAESAR AND CHRIST 


3 ° 


(chap. II 


the simplicity of his life and morals, and perhaps the more easily to show 
the scars he had won in the field. If elected, he entered office on the ensuing 
March 15. The consul took on sanctity by leading the state in the most 
solemn rehgious rites. In peace he summoned and presided over the Senate 
and the Assembly, initiated legislation, administered justice, and in general 
executed the laws. In war he levied armies, raised funds, and shared with 
his fellow consul command of the legions. If both of them died or were 
captured during their year of office, the Senate declared an interregnum, 
and appointed an interrex (or interval-king) for five days, while a new elec- 
tion was being prepared. The word suggests that the consuls had inherited, 
for their brief term, the powers of the kings. 

The consul was limited by the equal authority of his colleague, by the 
pressure of the Senate, and by the veto power of the tribune. After 367 b.c. 
fourteen mihtary tribunes were chosen to lead the tribes in war, and ten 
“tribunes of the plebs” to represent them in peace. These ten were sacro- 
sancti: it was a sacrilege, as well as a capital crime, to lay violent hands upon 
them except under a legitimate dictatorship. Their function was to protect 
the people against the government, and to stop by one -word— veto, ^‘I forbid” 
—the whole machinery of the state, whenever to any one of them this seemed 
desirable. As a silent observer the tribune could attend the meetings of the 
Senate, report its deliberations to the people, and, by his veto, deprive the 
Senate’s decisions of all legal force. The door of his inviolable home remained 
open day and night to any citizen who sought his protection or his aid, and 
this right of sanctuary or asylum provided the equivalent of habeas corpus. 
Seated on his tribunal he could act as judge, and from his decision there 
was no appeal except to the Assembly of the Tribes. It was his duty to 
secure the accused a fair trial, and, when possible, to win some pardon for 
the condemned. 

How did the aristocracy retain its ascendancy despite these obstructive 
powers? First, by hmiting them to the city of Rome and to times of peace; 
in war the tribunes obeyed the consuls. Secondly, by persuading the Tribal 
Assembly to elect wealthy plebeians as tribunes; the prestige of wealth and 
the diffidence of poverty moved the people to choose the rich to defend the 
poor. Thirdly, by allowing the number of tribunes to be raised from four 
to ten; if only one of these ten would listen to reason or money, his veto 
could frustrate the rest.^® In the course of time the tribunes became so 
dependable that they could be trusted to convene the Senate, take part in 
its deliberations, and become life members of it after their terms. 

If all these maneuvers failed, a last bulwark of social order remained— 
dictatorship. The Romans recognized that in times of national chaos or 
peril their liberties and privileges, and all the checks and balances that they 



THE STRUGGLE FOR DEMOCRACY 


CHAP. Il) 


31 


had created for their own protection, might impede the rapid and united 
action needed to save the state. In such cases the Senate could declare an 
emergency, and then either consul could name a dictator. In every instance 
but one the dictators came from the upper classes; but it must be said that 
the aristocracy rarely abused the possibilities of this office. The dictator 
received almost complete authority over all persons and property, but he 
could not use public funds without the Senate’s consent, and his term was 
limited to six months or a year. All dictators but two obeyed these restric- 
tions, honoring the story of how Cincinnatus, called from the plow to save 
the state (456 b.c.), returned to his farm as soon as the task was done. When 
this precedent was violated by Sulla and Caesar, the Republic passed back 
into the monarchy out of which it had come. 


3 . The Begmnings of Roman Law 

Within this unique constitution the magistrates administered a system of 
law based upon the Twelve Tables of the Decemvirs. Before that epochal 
enactment Roman law had been a mixture of tribal customs, royal edicts, 
and priestly commands. Alos maionm— the way of the ancients— remained 
to the end of pagan Rome the exemplar of morals and a source of law; and 
though imagination and edification idealized the ruthless burghers of the 
early Republic, the tales told of them helped educators to form a stoic 
character in Roman youth. For the rest, early Roman law was a priestly 
rule, a branch of religion, surrounded with sacred sanctions and solemn 
rites. Law was both lex and mr— command and justice; it was a relation not 
only between man and man but beuveen man and the gods. Crime was a 
disturbance of that relation, of the pax deonmi or peace of the gods; law 
and punishment were in theory designed to maintain or restore that rela- 
tion and peace. The priests declared what was right and wrong {fas et nefas ) , 
on what days the courts might open and the assembhes meet. All questions 
regarding marriage or divorce, cehbacy or incest, wills or transfers, or the 
rights of children, required the priest as now so many of them require the 
lawyer. Only the priests knew the formulas without which hardly any- 
thing could be legally done. They were in Rome the first iurisconmlti, 
consultants in the law, counselors; they were the first to give responsa, or 
legal opinions. The laws were recorded in their books, and these volumes 
were so securely guarded from the plebs that suspicion charged the priests 
with altering the texts, on occasion, to suit ecclesiastical or aristocratic ends. 

The Twelve Tables effected a double juristic revolution: the publication 
and secularization of Roman law. Like other codes of the sixth and fifth 



32 CAESAR AND CHRIST (cHAP. II 

centuries— those of Charondas, Zaleucus, Lycurgus, Solon— they represented 
a change from uncertain unwritten custom to definite written law; they 
were a result of increasing literacy and democracy. The his civile, or law 
of citizens, freed itself in these Tables from the ius divimim, or divine law; 
Rome decided not to be a theocracy. The priestly monopoly was further 
deflated when the secretary of Appius Claudius the Blind published (304) a 
calendar of court days {dies fasti— “days of utterance”), and a “formulary” 
of proper legal procedures, which had till then been known to few but the 
priests. Secularization took another step when Coruncanius (280) began 
the first known public instruction in Roman law; from that time onward the 
lawyer replaced the priest and dominated the mind and life of Rome. Soon 
the Tables were made the basis of education; till Cicero’s day all schoolboys 
had to learn them by heart; and doubtless they had a share in forming the 
stem and orderly, litigious and legalistic, Roman soul. Amended and sup- 
plemented again and again— by legislation, praetorial edicts, senatiisconsulta, 
and imperial- decrees— the Twelve Tables remained for nine hundred years 
the basic law of Rome. 

The law of procedure was already complex in this code. Almost any magistrate 
might act as a judge; but the praetors were the usual court, and their revisions 
and interpretations of the statutes kept Roman law a living growth instead of 
a corpse of precedents. Every year the praetor urbanus, or chief city magistrate, 
drew up a list or “white tablet” {album) of senators and equites eligible for 
jury service; the presiding judge in an action chose jurors from this list, subject 
to a limited number of rejections by plaintiff and defendant. Lawyers were per- 
mitted to advise clients and plead in court; and some senators gave legal advice 
in public sittings or at home. The law of Cincius (204 b.c.) forbade taking pay 
for legal services, but legal skill found ways of circumventing this counsel of 
perfection. Slaves were often tortured to elicit evidence. 

The Twelve Tables constituted one of the severest codes in history. They 
retained the old paternal omnipotence of a military-agricultural society; allowed 
the father to scourge, chain, imprison, sell, or kill any of his children— merely 
adding that a son thrice sold was thereafter free from his father’s rule.^® Class 
division was preserved by forbidding the marriage of a patrician with a plebeian. 
Creditors received every right against debtors.^^ Ov-ners could dispose freely 
of their property by will; property rights were held so sacred that a thief 
caught in the act was given as a slave to the man whom he had robbed. Penalties 
ranged from simple fines to exile, enslavement, or death. Several took the form 
of equivalent retaliation {lex talionh)-, many were fines delicately adjusted to 
the rank of the victim. “For breaking the bones of a freeman, 300 asses; of a 
slave, 150 asses.” Death was decreed for libel, bribery, perjury, harvest thiev- 
ing, nocturnal damage to a neighbor’s crops, the defrauding of a “client” by a 
patron, “practicing enchantments,” arson, murder, and “seditious gatherings 



CHAP.Il) THE STRUGGLE FOR DEMOCRACY 33 

in the city by night.” The parricide was tied in a sack, sometimes with a cock, 
a dog, a monkey, or a viper, and cast into the river.-® Within the capital, how- 
ever, appeal from any but a dictator’s sentence of death could be taken by a 
citizen to the Assembly of the Centuries; and if the accused perceived that the 
vote there was going against him he was free to commute his sentence into exile 
by leaving Rome.-^ Consequently, despite the severity of the Twelve Tables, 
capital punishment of freemen was rare in republican Rome. 

4. The Army of the Republic 

The Roman constitution rested finally on the most successful military organi- 
zation in history. The citizens and the army were one; the army assembled in 
its centuries was the chief lawmaking body in the state. The first eighteen cen- 
turies supplied the cavalry; the “first class” formed the heavy infantry, armed 
with two spears, a dagger, and a sword, and protected by bronze helmet, cuirass, 
greaves, and shield; the second class had all of these except the cuirass; the 
third and fourth had no armor; the fifth had only slings and stones. 

A legion was a mixed brigade of some 4200 infantry, 300 cavalry, and various 
auxiliary groups; uvo legions made a consul’s army. Each legion was sub- 
divided into centuries— originally of one hundred, later of two hundred, men— 
commanded by centurions. Every legion had its vexilhmt— its banner or colors; 
honor forbade that this should ever fall into hostile hands, and clever officers 
sometimes threw it into the enemy’s ranks to stir their men to a desperate 
recovery. In battle the front ranks of the infantry hurled at the foe, ten to twenty 
paces away, a volley of javelins- short wooden lances with an iron point— while 
on the wings archers and slingers attacked with arrows and stones, and the 
cavalry charged with pikes and swords; hand-to-hand combats with short swords 
were the final and decisive action. In a siege massive wooden catapults, worked 
by tension or torsion, hurled ten-pound rocks over 300 yards; immense batter- 
ing rams, suspended on ropes, were drawn back like a swing and then released 
against the enemy’s walls; an inclined ramp of earth and timber was built, 
wheeled towers were pushed and hauled up this ramp, and from these towers 
missiles were discharged upon the foe.-® Instead of the solid and unwieldy 
phalanx-six lines of 500 men each-which the early Republic seems to have taken 
over from Etruria, the legion was rearranged, about 366 b.c., into maniples * of 
two centuries each; free room was left betwxen each maniple and its neighbors, 
and the maniples of each succeeding line stood behind these open spaces. This 
formation made possible a rapid reinforcement of one line by the next, and a 
quick veering of one or more maniples to face a flank attack, and it gave free 

* Manipuhis meant a handful of hay, ferns, etc.; attached to a pole this seems to have 
formed a primitive military standard; hence the word came to mean a body of soldiers serv- 
ing under the same ensign. 



CAESAR AND CHRIST 


34 


(chap. II 


play to that individual combat for which the Roman soldier was especially- 
trained. 

The major element in the success of this army was discipline. The young 
Roman was educated for war from his childhood; he studied the military art 
above all others, and spent ten formative years of his life in field or camp. 
Cowardice was in that army the unforgivable sin, punished by flogging the 
offender to death.-^ The general was empowered to behead any soldier or officer, 
not merely for flight from battle, but for any deviation from orders, however 
favorable the result. Deserters or thieves had their right hands cut off."^ Food 
in camp was simple: bread or porridge, some vegetables, sour wine, rarely flesh; 
the Roman army conquered the world on a vegetarian diet; Caesar’s troops 
complained when corn ran out and they had to eat meat.-® Labor was so arduous 
and long that the soldiers begged for battle instead; valor became the better part 
of discretion. The soldier received no pay till 405 b.c., and little thereafter; but 
he was allowed to share, according to his rank, in the booty of the defeated— 
bullion and currency, lands and men and movable goods. Such training made not 
only brave and eager warriors but able and intrepid generals; the discipline of 
obedience developed the capacity to command. The army of the Repubhc lost 
battles, but it never lost a war. Men molded by stoic education and brutal spec- 
tacles to a contemptuous familiarity with death carved out the victories that 
conquered Italy, then Carthage and Greece, and then the Mediterranean world. 


Such in outline was the “mixed constitution” that Polybius admired as 
“the best of all existing governments”: a limited democracy in the legislative 
sovereignty of the assembhes, an aristocracy in the leadership of the patrician 
Senate, a Spartan “dyarchy” in the brief royalty of the consuls, a monarchy 
in occasional dictatorships. Essentially it was an aristocracy, in which old 
and rich families, through ability and privilege, held office for hundreds of 
years, and gave to Roman policy a tenacious continuity that was the secret 
of its accomplishments. 

But it had its faults. It was a clumsy confusion of checks and balances in 
which nearly every command could in time of peace be nullified by an equal 
and opposite command. The division of power was an aid to hberty and— 
for a while— a restraint on malfeasance; on the other hand, it led to great 
military disasters like Cannae, it dissolved democracy into mob rule, and at 
last brought on the permanent dictatorship of the Principate. WTiat aston- 
ishes us is that such a government could last so long (508 to 49 b.c.) and 
achieve so much. Perhaps it endured because of its muddling adaptability 
to change, and the proud patriotism formed in the home, the school, the 
temple, the army, the Assembly, and the Senate. Devotion to the state 
marked the zenith of the Republic, as unparalleled political corruption 



THE STRUGGLE FOR DEMOCRACY 


CHAP, II) 


35 


marked its fall. Rome remained great as long as she had enemies who forced 
her to unity, vision, and heroism. When she had overcome them ail she 
flourished for a moment and then began to die. 


III. THE CONQUEST OF ITALY 

Never had Rome been so encompassed by enemies as when she emerged 
from the monarchy as a weak city-state ruling only 350 square miles 
—equivalent to a space nineteen by nineteen miles. "While Lars Porsena ad- 
vanced upon her, many of the neighboring communities that had been sub- 
jected by her kings resumed their liberty and formed a Latin League to 
withstand Rome. Italy was a medley of independent tribes or cities, each 
with its own government and dialect; in the north the Ligures, Gauls, 
Umbrians, Etruscans, and Sabines; to the south the Latins, Volscians, Sam- 
nites, Lucanians, Bruttians; along the western and southern coasts Greek 
colonists in Cumae, Naples, Pompeii, Paestum, Locri, Rhegium, Crotona, 
Metapontum, Tarentum. Rome was at the center of them all, strategically 
placed for expansion, but perilously open to attack from all sides at once. 
It was her salvation that her enemies seldom united against her. In 505, while 
she was at war with the Sabines, a powerful Sabine clan— the Claudian gens 
—came over to Rome and was granted citizenship on favorable terms. In 
449 the Sabines were defeated; by 290 all their territory was annexed to 
Rome, and by 250 they had received the full Roman franchise. 

In 496 the Tarquins persuaded some of the towns of Latium— Tusculum, Ardea, 
Lanuvium, Aricia, Tibur, and others— to join in a war against Rome. Faced with 
this apparently overwhelming combination, the Romans appointed their first dic- 
tator, Aulus Postumius; at Lake Regillus they won a saving victory, helped, they 
assure us, by the gods Castor and Pollux, who left Olympus to fight in their ranks. 
Three years later Rome signed a treaty with the Latin League in which all parties 
pledged that “beuveen the Romans and the cities of the Latins there shall be 
peace as long as heaven and earth shall last. . . . Both shall share equallv in all 
booty taken in a common war.” Rome became a member of the League, then 
its leader, then its master. In 493 she fought the \"olscians; it was in this conflict 
that Caius Marcius won the name of Coriolanus by capturing Corioli, the Volscian 
capital. The historians add, probably with a touch of romance, that Coriolanus 
became a hard reactionary, was banished on the insistence of the plebs (491), 
fled to the Volscians, reorganized them, and led them in a siege of Rome. The 
starting Romans, we are told, sent embassy after embassy to dissuade him, to 
no avail, until his mother and wife went out to liim and, failing in their pleas, 
threatened to block his advance with their bodies. Thereupon he withdrew- his 



$6 CAESAR AND CHRIST (cHAP. II 

army, and was killed by the Volscians; or, says another story, he lived among 
them to a bitter ripe old age.“® In 405 Veil and Rome entered upon a duel to the 
death for control of the Tiber. Rome besieged the city for nine years without 
success, and the emboldened towns of Etruria joined in the war. Attacked on 
every side, and their very existence challenged, the Romans appointed a dictator, 
Camillus, who raised a new army, captured Veii, and divided its lands among the 
citizens of Rome. In 351, after sundry further wars, southern Etruria was an- 
nexed to Rome under the almost modern name of Tuscia. 

Meanwhile, in 390, a new and greater peril appeared, and that long duel had 
begun, between Rome and Gaul, which ended only with Caesar. While Etruria 
and Rome were fighting fourteen wars, Celtic tribes from Gaul and Germany 
had filtered down through the Alps and settled in Italy as far south as the Po. 
Ancient historians called the invaders Keltai or Celtae, Galatae or Galli, indif- 
ferently. Nothing is known of their origin; we may only describe them as that 
branch of the Indo-European stock which peopled western Germany, Gaul, 
central Spain, Belgium, Wales, Scotland, and Ireland, and formed the pre- 
Roman languages there. Polybius pictures them as “tall and handsome,” relishing 
war, and fighting naked except for golden amulets and chains.^® When the Celts 
of southern Gaul tasted Italian wine, they were so pleased with it that they 
decided to visit the land that produced such transporting fruit; probably they 
were moved more by the quest for fresh acres and new pasturage. Entering, they 
lived for a time in abnormal peace, tilling and herding, and taking over the Etrus- 
can culture which they found in the towns. About 400 B.c. they invaded and 
plundered Etruria; the Etruscans resisted weakly, having sent most of their forces 
to defend Veii against Rome. In 391, 30,000 Gauls reached Clusium; a year later 
they met the Romans at the river Allia, routed them, and entered Rome un- 
hindered. They sacked and burned large sections of the city, and for seven 
months besieged the remnants of the Roman army on the Capitol— the crest of the 
Capitoline hill. Finally the Romans yielded, and paid the Gauls a thousand pounds 
of gold to depart.* They left, but returned in 367, 358, and 350; repeatedly re- 
pulsed, they at last contented themselves with northern Italy, which now became 
Cisalpine Gaul. 

The surviving Romans found their city so devastated that many of them 
wished to abandon the site and make Veii their capital. Camillus dissuaded them, 
and the government provided financial aid for rebuilding homes. This rapid 
reconstruction in the face of many enemies was a part cause of Rome’s design- 
lessness and the venturesome crookedness of her narrow streets. The subject 
peoples, seeing her so near destruction, revolted again and again, and half a 
century of intermittent war was required to cure their lust for freedom. The 
Latins, Aequi, Hernici, and Volscians attacked in turn or together; if the \^ol- 
scians had succeeded they would have shut off Rome from southern Italy and 

* Livy’s story so that at the last moment Camillus refused to hand over the gold, and drove 
the Gauls out by force, is now by common consent rejected as an invention of Roman pride. 
No nation is ever defeated in its textbooks. 



CHAP.Il) THE STRUGGLE FOR DEMOCRACY 37 

the sea, and perhaps have put an end to her history. In 340 the cities of the Latin 
League were defeated; two years later Rome dissolved the League and annexed 
nearly all Latium.* 

Meanwhile the victories of Rome over the Volscians had brought her face to 
face with the powerful Samnite tribes. These held a large cross section of Italy 
from Naples to the Adriatic, with such rich cities as Nola, Beneventum, Cumae, 
and Capua. They had absorbed most of the Etruscan and Greek settlements of 
the west coast, and enough of Hellenism to produce a distinctive Campanian art; 
probably they were more civilized than the Romans. With them Rome fought 
three long and bloody wars for the control of Italy. At the Caudine Forks (321) 
the Romans suffered one of their greatest defeats, and their beaten army passed 
“under the yoke”— an arch of hostile spears— in token of submission. The con- 
suls at the front signed an abject peace, which the Senate refused to ratify. The 
Samnites won the Etruscans and Gauls as allies, and for a time Rome faced nearly 
all Italy in arms. But the legions gained a decisive victory at Sentinum (295), 
and Rome added Campania and Umbria to her domain. Twelve years later she 
drove the Gauls back beyond the Po, and again reduced Etruria to a subject state. 

Between the Gallic north and the Greek south, Rome was now master of 
Italy. Insatiate and insecure, she offered the cities of Magna Graecia a choice 
between alliance under Roman hegemony and war. Preferring Rome to 
further absorption by the “barbarian” (i.e., Italian) tribes who were multi- 
plying around and within them, Thurii, Locri, and Crotona consented; 
probably they, too, like the towns of Latium, were troubled by class war, 
and received Roman garrisons as a protection of property owners against 
a rising plebs.®^ Tarentum was obstinate, and called over to her aid Pyrrhus, 
King of Epirus. This gallant warrior, fevered with memories of Achilles 
and Alexander, crossed the Adriatic with an Epirote force, defeated the 
Romans at Heraclea (280), and gave an adjective to European languages 
by mourning the costliness of his victor}^.®® All the Greek cities of Italy now 
joined him, and the Lucanians, Bruttians, and Samnites declared themselves 
his allies. He dispatched Cineas to Rome with offers of peace, and freed 
his 2000 Roman prisoners on their word to return if Rome preferred war. 
The Senate was about to make terms when old blind Appius Claudius, who 
had long since retired from public life, had himself carried to the senate 
house and demanded that Rome should never make peace with a foreign 
army on Italian soil. The Senate sent back to Pyrrhus the prisoners whom 
he had released, and resumed the war. The young king won another victor}"; 
then, disgusted with the sloth and cowardice of his allies, he sailed with his 

* This war was marked by two probably legendary deeds. One consul, Publius Decius, 
rode to his death amid the enemy as a sacrifice to win the aid of the gods for Rome; the other 
consul, Titus Manlius Torquatus, beheaded his son for winning an engagement by disobeying 
orders.^! 



CAESAR AND CHRIST 


38 


(chap. IJ 


depleted army to Sicily. He relieved the Carthaginian siege of Syracuse and 
drove the Carthaginians from nearly all their possessions on the island; but 
his imperious rule offended the Sicilian Greeks, who thought they could 
have freedom without order and courage; they withdrew their support, and 
Pyrrhus returned to Italy, saying of Sicily, “What a prize I leave to be 
fought for by Carthage and Rome!” His army met the Romans at Bene- 
ventum, where for the first time he suffered defeat (275); the light-armed 
and mobile maniples proved superior to the unwieldy phalanxes, and began 
a new chapter in military history. Pyrrhus appealed to his Italian allies for 
new troops; they refused, doubting his fidelity and persistence. He re- 
turned to Epirus, and died an adventurer’s death in Greece. In that same 
year (272) Milo betrayed Tarentum to Rome. Soon all the Greek cities 
yielded, the Samnites sullenly surrendered, and Rome was at last, after two 
centuries of war, the ruler of Italy. 

The conquest was quickly consolidated with colonies, some sent out 
by the Latin League, some by Rome. These colonies served many pur- 
poses: they relieved unemployment, the pressure of population upon the 
means of subsistence, and consequent class strife in Rome; they acted as 
garrisons or loyal nuclei amid disaffected subjects, provided outposts and 
outlets for Roman trade, and raised additional food for hungry mouths in 
the capital; conquests in Italy were completed with the plow soon after 
they had been begun by the sword. In these ways hundreds of Italian towns 
that still live today received their foundation or their Romanization. The 
Latin language and culture were spread throughout a peninsula still largely 
polyglot and barbarous, and Italy was slowly forged into a united state. The 
first step had been taken in a political synthesis brutal in execution, majestic 
in result. 

But in Corsica, Sardinia, Sicily, and Africa, closing the western Medi- 
terranean to Roman trade, and imprisoning Italy in her own seas, stood a 
power older and richer than Rome. 



CHAPTER III 


Hannibal Against Rome 

264-202 B.C. 


I. CARTHAGE 

S OME eleven hundred years before our era the inquisitive traders of 
Phoenicia discovered the mineral wealth of Spain. Soon a fleet of mer- 
chant vessels plied between Sidon, Tyre, and Byblus, at one end of the 
Mediterranean, and Tartessus, at the mouth of the Guadalquivir, on the 
other. Since such voyages could not then be made without many stops, and 
the southern shores of the Mediterranean provided the shortest and safest 
route, the Phoenicians established intermediate posts and trading stations on 
the African coast at Leptis Magna (now Lebda), Hadrumetum (Sousse), 
Utica (Utique), Hippo Diarrhytus (Bizerte), Hippo Regius (Bone), and 
even beyond Gibraltar at Lixus (south of Tangier). The Semitic settlers at 
these posts married some of the natives and bribed the rest to peace. About 
813 B.C. a new group of colonists, perhaps from Phoenicia, perhaps from 
expanding Utica, built their homes upon a promontory ten miles northwest 
of the modem Tunis. The narrow peninsula could be easily defended, and 
the land, watered by the Bagradas (Medjerda) River, was so fertile that it 
quickly recovered from repeated devastation. Classic tradition ascribed the 
founding of the city to Elissa, or Dido, daughter of the king of Tyre: her 
husband having been slain by her brother, she had sailed with other ad- 
venturous souls to Africa. Her settlement was called Kart-hadasht— New- 
town— to distinoruish it from Utica: the Greeks transformed the name into 

O ^ 

Karchedon, the Romans into Carthago. The Latins gave the name Africa 
to the region around Carthage and Utica, and followed the Greeks in call- 
ing its Semitic population Poem—i.e., Phoenicians. The sieges of Tyre by 
Shalmaneser, Nebuchadrezzar, and Alexander drove many wealthy Tyrians 
to Africa. Most of them went to Carthage, and made it a new center of 
Phoenician trade. Carthage grew in power and splendor as Tyre and Sidon 
declined. 

The strengthened city drove the African natives farther and farther in- 
land, ceased to pay tribute to them, exacted tribute from them, and used 
them as slaves and serfs in its homes and fields. Large estates took form, some 

39 



CAESAR AND CHRIST 


40 


(chap, in 


with 20,000 men; ^ in the hands of the practical Phoenicians agriculture be- 
came a science and an industry, which the Carthaginian Mago summarized 
in a famous manual. Irrigated with canals, the soil flowered into gardens, 
cornfields, vineyards, and orchards of ohves, pomegranates, pears, cherries, 
and figs.^ Horses and cattle, sheep and goats, were bred; asses and mules were 
the beasts of burden, and the elephant was one of many domesticated ani- 
mals. Urban industry was relatively immature, except for metalwork; the 
Carthaginians, like their Asiatic forebears, preferred to trade what others 
made. They led their pack mules east and west and across the Sahara to 
find elephants, ivory, gold, or slaves. Their immense galleys carried goods 
to and from a hundred ports between Asia and Britain, for they refused to 
turn back, like most other mariners, at the Pillars of Hercules. It was pre- 
sumably they who, about 490 b.c., financed Hanno’s voyage of exploration 
2600 miles down the Atlantic coast of Africa, and the voyage of Himilco 
along the northern shores of Europe. Though their coinage was undis- 
tinguished, they were apparently the first to issue the equivalent of a paper 
currency— leather strips stamped with signs of value, and accepted through- 
out the Carthaginian realm. 

Probably it was the rich merchants, rather than the aristocratic land- 
owners, who provided the funds for those armies and navies which trans- 
formed Carthage from a trading post into an empire. The African coast— 
except Utica— was conquered from Cyrenaica to Gibraltar and beyond. 
Tartessus, Gades (Cadiz), and other Spanish towns were captured, and 
Carthage grew wealthy from the gold, silver, iron, and copper of Spain. It 
took the Balearic Islands, and reached out even to Madeira; it conquered 
Malta, Sardinia, Corsica, and the western half of Sicily. It treated these 
subject lands with var)dng degrees of severity, charging them annual tribute, 
conscripting their population for its army, and strictly controlling then- 
foreign relations and their trade. In return it gave them military protection, 
local self-government, and economic stability. We may judge the wealth 
of these dependencies from the fact that the town of Leptis Minor paid 365 
talents ($1,314,000) a year into the Carthaginian treasury. 

The exploitation of this empire and trade made Carthage, in the third 
century b.c., the richest of Mediterranean cities. Tariffs and tribute brought 
her annually 12,000 talents— twenty times the revenue of Athens at her 
zenith. The upper classes lived in palaces, wore costly robes, and ate exotic 
delicacies. The city, crowded with a quarter of a million inhabitants, became 
famous for its gleaming temples, its public baths, above all for its secure 
harbors and spacious docks. Each of the 220 docks was faced with two 
Ionic pillars, so that the inner harbor (“cothon”) presented a majestic circle 
of 440 marble columns. Thence a broad avenue led to the Forum, a colon- 



CHAP. IIi; HANNIBAL AGAINST ROME 4I 

naded square adorned with Greek sculpture and containing administrative 
buildings, commercial offices, law courts, and temples; while the adjoining 
streets. Orientally narrow, teemed with a thousand shops plying a hundred 
crafts and resounded with bargaining. Houses rose to six stories, and often 
crowded a family into a single room. In the center of the city, providing 
one of many hints to the later builders of Rome, stood a hill or citadel— 
the Byrsa; here were the Treasury and the Aiint, more shrines and colon- 
nades, and the most brilliant of Carthaginian temples— to the great god 
Eshmun. Around the landward side of the city ran a threefold protective 
wall forty-five feet high, with still higher towers and battlements; within 
the wall were accommodations for 4000 horses, 300 elephants, and 20,000 
men.® Outside the walls were the estates of the rich, and beyond these, the 
fields of the poor. 

The Carthaginians were Semites, akin in blood and features to the ancient 
Jews. Their language now and then struck a Hebraic note, as when it called 
the chief magistrates sho^etes—t\\t Hebrew shophetim, or judges. The men 
grew beards, but usually shaved the upper lip with bronze razors. Most of 
them wore a fez or a turban, shoes or sandals, and a long loose gown; but 
the upper classes adopted the Greek style of dress, dyed their robes with 
purple, and fringed them with glass beads. The women led for the most 
part a veiled and secluded life; they could rise to high place in the priesthoods 
but otherwise had to be contented with the sovereignty of their charms. 
Both sexes used jewelry and perfume, and occasionally displayed a ring in 
the nose. We know little of their morals except from their enemies. Greek 
and Roman writers describe them as heavy eaters and drinkers, loving to 
gather in dinner clubs, and as loose in their sex relations as they were corrupt 
in their politics. The treacherous Romans employed fides Cartha- 

ginian faith— as a synonym for treachery. Polybius reported that “at 
Carthage nothing that results in profit is regarded as disgraceful.” ^ Plutarch 
denounced the Carthaginians as “harsh and gloomy, docile to their rulers, 
hard to their subjects, running to extremes of cowardice in fear and of 
savagery in anger, stubborn in decisions, austere, and unresponsive to amuse- 
ment or the graces of life.” ® But Plutarch, though usually fair, was always 
a Greek; and Polybius was bosom friend of the Scipio who burned Carthage 
to the ground. 

The Carthaginians appear at their worst in their religion, which again 
we know only from their enemies. Their ancestors in Phoenicia had wor- 
shiped Baal-Moloch and Astarte as personifying the male and female prin- 
ciples in nature, and the sun and moon in the sky; the Carthaginians ad- 
dressed similar devotions to corresponding deities— Baal-Haman and Tanith. 
Tanith above all aroused their loving piety; they filled her temples with 



CAESAR AND CHRIST 


42 


(chap, m 


gifts, and took her name in their oaths. Third in honor was the god Melkart, 
“Key of the City”; then Eshmun, god of wealth and health; then a host of 
minor gods— “baals” or lords; even Dido was worshiped.® To Baal-Haman, 
in great crises, living children were sacrificed, as many as three hundred in a 
day. They were placed upon the inchned and outstretched arms of the idol 
and rolled off into the fire beneath; their cries were drowned in the noise 
of trumpets and cymbals; their mothers were required to look upon the 
scene without moan or tear, lest they be accused of impiety and lose the 
credit due them from the god. In time the rich refused to sacrifice their 
own children and bought substitutes among the poor; but when Agathocles 
of Syracuse besieged Carthage, the upper classes, fearing that their subter- 
fuge had offended the god, cast two hundred aristocratic infants into the 
fire.'^ It should be added that these stories are told us by Diodorus, a Sicilian 
Greek, who looked with equanimity upon the Greek custom of infanticide. 
It may be that the Carthaginian sacrifice solaced with piety an effort to 
control the excesses of human fertility. 


When the Romans destroyed Carthage they presented the libraries they found 
there to their African allies. Of these collections nothing survives except Hanno’s 
record of his voyage, and fragments of Mago on husbandry. Saint Augustine 
vaguely assures us that “in Carthage there were many things wisely handed down 
to memory,” ® and Sallust and Juba made use of Carthaginian historians; but we 
have no native account of Carthage’s history. Of its architecture the Romans left 
not a stone upon a stone. We are told that its style was a mixture of Phoenician 
and Greek, that its temples were massive and ornate; that the temple and statue of 
Baal-Haman were plated with gold valued at a thousand talents; ® and that even 
the proud Greeks considered Carthage one of the world’s most beautiful capitals. 
The museums of Tunis contain some pieces of sculpture from sarcophagi found 
in tombs near the site of Carthage; the finest is a strong and graceful figure, per- 
haps of Tanith, in a manner essentially Greek. Smaller statues, unearthed from 
Carthaginian graves in the Baleares, are crude and often repulsively grotesque, 
as if designed to impress children or frighten devils away. The surviving pottery 
is purely utilitarian; but we know that Carthaginian craftsmen did good work in 
textiles, jewelry, ivory, ebony, amber, and glass. 

Any clear picture of Carthaginian government is now beyond our pens. 
Aristotle praised the constitution of Carthage as “in many respects superior to 
all others,” for “a state is proved to be well ordered when the commons are 
steadily loyal to the constitution, when no civil conflict worth speaking of has 
arisen, and when no one has succeeded in making himself dictator.” The 
citizens met occasionally in an Assembly empowered to accept or reject, but 
not to discuss or amend, proposals referred to it by a Senate of three hundred 
elders; the Senate, however, was not obliged to submit to the Assembly any 
measures upon which it could itself agree.^^ The people elected the Senate, but 



HANNIBAL AGAINST ROME 


43 


CHAP. Ill) 

open bribery reduced the virtue or danger of this democratic procediHe, and 
replaced an aristocracy of birth with an oligarchy of wealth. From nominations 
presented by the Senate, the Assembly annually chose two shofetes to head the 
judicial and administrative branches of the state. Above all these bodies was a 
court of 104 judges, who, in contravention of the law, held office for life. As it 
was empowered to supervise all administration, and to require an accounting 
from every official at the end of his term, this court acquired, by the time of 
the Punic Wars, supreme control over every governmental agency and every 
citizen. 

The commander of the armies was nominated by the Senate and chosen by the 
Assembly. He was in a better position than the Roman consul, for his command 
could be continued as long as the Senate desired. The Roman, however, led 
against Carthage legions of landowning patriots, whereas the Carthaginian army 
was a mercenary force of foreign— chiefly Libyan— origin, feeling no affection 
for Carthage, but loyal only to its paymaster and, occasionally, to its general. 
The Carthaginian navy was without question the most powerful of its time; 
500 quinqueremes, gaily painted, slim and swift, ably protected Carthaginian 
colonies, markets, and trade routes. It was the conquest of Sicily by this army, 
and the closing of the western Mediterranean to Roman commerce by this navy, 
that brought on the century-long duel to the death known to us as the three 
Punic Wars. 


II. REGULUS 

The two nations had once been friends when one of them was strong 
enough to dominate the other. In 508 they had made a treaty that recog- 
nized the hegemony of Rome over the coast of Latium, but pledged the 
Romans not to sail the Mediterranean west of Carthage, nor to land in 
Sardinia or Libya except for the brief repair or provisioning of ships.^^ It 
became a common practice among the Carthaginians, says a Greek geog- 
rapher, to drown any foreign sailor found beuveen Sardinia and Gibraltar.^® 
The Greeks of Massalia (Marseilles) had developed a peaceful coastal com- 
merce between southern Gaul and northeastern Spain; Carthage, we are 
told, warred on this trade piratically, and Massalia was a faithful ally of 
Rome. (We do not know how much of this is war propaganda dignified 
as history.) Now that Rome controlled Italy she could not feel secure so 
long as two hostile powers— Greeks and Carthaginians— held Sicily, hardly 
a mile from the Italian coast. Besides, Sicily was fertile; it might supply half 
of Italy with gr ain . Sicily taken, Sardinia and Corsica would of themselves 
fall into Roman hands. Here was manifest destiny, the natural next step in 
the expansion of Rome. 

How to find a casus belli? About 264 b.c. a band of Samnite mercenaries 
who called themselves Mamertines— i.e., “Men of Mars”— seized the town of 



CAESAR AND CHRIST 


44 


(chap. Ill 


Messana, on the Sicilian coast nearest to Italy. They slew or expelled the 
Greek citizens, divided among themselves the women, children, and goods 
of the victims, and made a hving by raiding the Greek cities near by. Hiero II, 
Dictator of Syracuse, besieged them; a Carthaginian force landed at Messana, 
drove Hiero back, and took possession of the city. The Mamertines appealed 
to Rome for help in expelling their saviors. The Senate hesitated, knowing 
the power and wealth of Carthage; but the rich plebeians who dominated 
the Centurial Assembly clamored for war and Sicily. Rome decided that at 
whatever cost she must keep the Carthaginians from so near and strategic 
a port. A fleet was fitted out and dispatched under Caius Claudius to rescue 
the Mamertines. But these had meanwhile been persuaded by the Carthagin- 
ians to withdraw their request for Roman aid, and a message from them 
to this effect reached Claudius at Rhegium. Ignoring it, he crossed the strait, 
invited the Carthaginian commander to a conference, imprisoned him, and 
sent word to the Carthaginian army that he would be killed if they resisted. 
The mercenaries welcomed so gallant an excuse for avoiding the legions, 
and Messana fell to Rome. 

Two heroes were thrown up by this First Punic War: on the Roman side, 
Regulus; on the Carthaginian, tiamilcar. Perhaps we should add a third 
and fourth— the Senate and the Roman people. The Senate won Hiero of 
Syracuse to Rome’s side, and thereby assured supplies for Roman troops in 
Sicily; it organized the nation with wisdom and resolution, and led it to 
victory through almost overwhelming disasters. The citizens provided 
money, materials, labor, and men to build Rome’s first fleet— 330 vessels, 
nearly all quinqueremes 150 feet long, each manned by 300 rowers and 120 
soldiers, and most of them equipped with novel grappling irons and movable 
gangways for seizing and boarding enemy ships; by these means naval war- 
fare, unfamihar to the Romans, could be turned into hand-to-hand combat, 
in which the legionaries could use all their disciplined skill. “This fact,” says 
Polybius, “shows us better than anything else how spirited and daring the 
Romans are when they are determined to do a thing. . . . They had never 
given a thought to a navy; yet when they had once conceived the project 
they took it in hand so boldly that before gaining any experience in such 
matters they at once engaged the Carthaginians, who for generations had 
held undisputed command of the sea.”^^ Off Ecnomus, on the southern coast 
of Sicily, the hostile fleets, carrying 300,000 men, fought the greatest sea 
battle of antiquity (256). The Romans under Regulus won decisively and 
sailed on unhindered to Africa. Landing there without careful reconnais- 
sance, they soon met a superior Carthaginian force, which almost annihilated 
them, and took their reckless consul prisoner. Shortly afterward the Roman 
fleet was dashed by a storm against a rocky coast, 284 vessels were wrecked. 



HANNIBAL AGAINST ROME 


CHAP. Ill) 


45 


and some 80,000 men were drowned; it was the worst naval calamity in the 
memory of men. The Romans showed their quality by building 200 new 
quinqueremes in three months, and training 80,000 men to man them. 

After keeping Regulus a prisoner for five years, his captors allowed him 
to accompany a Carthaginian embassy sent to Rome to seek peace, but on 
his promise to return to captivity if the Senate refused the proffered terms. 
When Regulus heard these he advised the Senate to reject them and, despite 
the entreaties of his family and his friends, went back with the embassy to 
Carthage. There he was tortured to death by being prevented from sleep- 
ing.^® His sons at Rome took two Carthaginian captives of high rank, bound 
them in a chest studded with spikes, and kept them awake till they died.^® 
Neither tale seems credible, until we recall the barbarities of our time. 


III. HAMILCAR 

Of Hamilcars, Hasdrubals, and Hannibals Carthage had an abundance, 
for these names were given in almost every generation in their oldest families. 
They were pious names, formed from those of the gods: Hamilcar was “He 
whom Melkart protects”; Hasdrubal was “He whose help is Baal”; Hannibal 
was the very “Grace of Baal.” Our present Hamilcar was sumamed Barca 
—“lightning”; it was his nature to strike swiftly, suddenly, anywhere. He 
was stiU a youth when (247) Carthage gave him supreme command of its 
forces. Taking a small fleet, he harassed the coast of Italy with surprise 
landings, destroying Roman outposts and taking many prisoners. Then, in 
the face of a Roman army holding Panormus (Palermo), he disembarked 
his troops and captured a height overlooking the town. His contingent was 
too small to risk a major engagement; but every time he led it forth it re- 
turned with spoils. He begged the Carthaginian Senate for reinforcements 
and supplies; it refused, hugged its hoards, and bade him feed and clothe 
his soldiers on the country that surrounded him. 

Meanwhile the Roman fleet had won another victory, but had suffered a 
serious defeat at Drepana (249). Worn out almost equally, the two nations 
rested for nine years. But while in those years Carthage did nothing, relying 
upon the genius of Hamilcar, a number of Roman citizens voluntarily pre- 
sented to the state a fleet of 200 men-of-war, carrying 60,000 troops. This 
new armada, sailing secretly, caught the Carthaginian fleet unprepared at 
the Aegadian Isles off the west coast of Sicily, and so overwhelmed it that 
Carthage sued for peace (241). Carthaginian Sicily was surrendered to 
Rome, an annual indemnity of 440 talents was pledged to Rome for ten 
years, and all Carthaginian restrictions on Roman trade were withdrawn. 



4*5 CAESAR AND CHRIST (cHAP. HI 

The war had lasted nearly twenty-four years and had brought Rome so 
near to bankruptcy that its currency was debased eighty-three per cent. But 
it had proved the irresistible tenacity of the Roman character and the 
superiority of an army composed of free men over mercenaries seeking the 
greatest booty for the least blood. 

Carthage was now to be all but destroyed by its own greed. It had with- 
held for some time the pay of its mercenaries, even of those who had served 
Hamilcar well. They poured into the city and demanded their money; and 
when the government temporized and tried to disperse them, they broke 
into mad revolt. Carthage’s subject peoples, taxed beyond endurance during 
the war, joined the uprising, and the women of Libya sold their jewels to 
finance revolution. Twenty thousand mercenaries and rebels, led by Matho, 
a Libyan freeman, and Spendius, a Campanian slave, laid siege to Carthage 
at a time when hardly a soldier was there to defend it. The rich merchants 
trembled for their lives and appealed to Hamilcar to save them. Tom be- 
tween affection for his mercenaries and his city, Hamilcar organized an army 
of 10,000 Carthaginians, trained them, led them forth, and raised the siege. 
The defeated mercenaries, retreating into the mountains, cut off - the hands 
and feet of Gesco, a Carthaginian general, and 700 other prisoners, broke 
their legs, and then threw the still living victims into an indiscriminate 
grave.^^ Hamilcar maneuvered 40,000 of the rebels into a defile and blocked 
all exits so well that they began to starve. They ate their remaining captives, 
then their slaves; at last they sent Spendius to beg for peace. Hamilcar cruci- 
fied Spendius and had hundreds of prisoners trampled to death under 
elephants’ feet. The mercenaries tried to fight their way out, but were cut 
to pieces. Matho was captured and was made to run through the streets of 
Carthage while the citizens beat him with thongs and tortured him till he 
died.^® This “War of the Mercenaries” lasted forty months (241-237), and 
“was by far,” said Polybius, “the most bloody and impious war in history.” 
When the conflict was over, Carthage found that Rome had occupied 
Sardinia. Carthage protested, and Rome declared war. The desperate 
Carthaginians bought peace only by paying Rome an additional 1200 talents, 
and surrendering Sardinia and Corsica. 

We may judge the fury of Hamilcar at this treatment of his country. He 
proposed to his government that it should provide him with troops and 
funds to re-establish the power of Carthage in Spain, as a steppingstone to 
an attack upon Italy. The landowning aristocracy opposed the plan, fearing 
further war; the mercantile middle class, resenting the loss of their foreign 
markets and ports, supported it. As a compromise Hamilcar was given a 
modest contingent, with which he crossed to Spain (238). He recaptured 
the cities whose allegiance to Carthage had lapsed during the war, built up 



HANNIBAL AGAINST ROME 


CHAP, hi) 


47 


his army with native recruits, financed and equipped it with the products 
of Spain’s mines, and died while leading a charge against a Spanish tribe 
(229), 

He left behind him in the camp his son-in-law Hasdrubal, and his sons 
Hannibal, Hasdrubal, and Mago— his “hon’s-brood.” The son-in-law was 
chosen commander, and for eight years governed wisely, winning the co- 
operation of the Spaniards and building near the silver mines a great city, 
known to Rome as Nova Carthago, or New Carthage— the Cartagena of 
today. When he was assassinated (221), the army elected as its leader 
Hamilcar’s eldest son, Hannibal, then twenty-six years of age. Before leav- 
ing Carthage, his father had brought him, a boy of nine, to the altar of 
Baal-Haman and had bidden him swear that someday he would revenge his 
country against Rome. Hannibal swore, and did not forget. 


IV. HANNIBAL 

Why had Rome permitted the reconquest of Spain? Because she was 
harassed with class strife, was expanding in the Adriatic, and was at war 
with the Gauls. In 232 a tribune, Caius Flaminius, foreshadowed the Gracchi 
by carrying through the Assembly, against the violent opposition of the 
Senate, a measure distributing among the poorer citizens some lands recently • 
won from the Gauls. In 230 Rome took her first step toward the conquest 
of Greece by clearing the Adriatic of pirates and seizing a part of the 
Illyrian coast as a further protection for Itahan trade. Safe now on south 
and east, she resolved to drive the Gauls over the Alps and make Italy a 
completely united state. To secure herself on the west she signed a treaty 
with Hasdrubal by which the Carthaginians in Spain agreed to stay south 
of the Ebro River; and at the same time she made an alliance with the semi- 
Greek towns of Saguntum and Ampurias.in Spain. In the following year 
(225) a Gallic army of 50,000 foot and 20,000 horse swept down the 
peninsula. The inhabitants of the capital were so frightened that the Senate 
returned to the primitive custom of human sacrifice and buried two Gauls 
alive in the Forum as an appeasement of the gods.^® The legions met the 
invaders near Telamon, killed 40,000, took 10,000 prisoners, and marched 
on to subjugate all Qsalpine Gaul. In three years the task was completed; 
protective colonies were established at Placentia and Cremona, and from 
the Alps to Sicily Italy was one. 

It was an untimely victory. Had the Gauls been left unmolested for a 
few years more they might have stopped Hannibal; but now all Gaul was 
aflame against Rome. Hannibal saw the opportunity he had longed for— 



CAESAR AND CHRIST 


48 


(chap. Ill 


to cross Gaul with little opposition and to invade Italy with Gallic tribes 
as his allies. 

The Punic leader was now twenty-eight years old, at his prime in body 
and mind. In addition to a Carthaginian gentleman’s schooling in the lan- 
guages, literatures, and history of Phoenicia and Greece,^^ he had received a 
soldier’s training through nineteen years in camp. He had disciplined his 
body to hardship, his appetite to moderation, his tongue to silence, his 
thought to objectivity. He could run or ride with the swiftest, hunt or fight 
with the bravest; he was “the first to enter the battle,” says the hostile Livy, 
“and the last to abandon the field.” The veterans loved him because in 
his commanding presence and piercing eyes they saw their old leader Hamil- 
car return to them in fresh youth; the recruits hked him because he wore 
no distinctive dress, never rested till he had provided for his army’s needs, 
and shared with them all sufferings and gains. The Romans accused him of 
avarice, cruelty, and treachery, for he honored no scruples in seizing sup- 
plies for his troops, punished disloyalty severely, and laid many snares for 
his foes. Yet we find him often merciful, always chivalrous. “Nothing occurs 
in the accounts of him,” says the judicious Mommsen, “which may not be 
justified under the circumstances, and according to the international law 
of the times.” The Romans could not readily forgive him for winning 
battles with his brains rather than with the lives of his men. The tricks he 
•played upon them, the skill of his espionage, the subtlety of his strategy, 
the surprises of his tactics were beyond their appreciation until Carthage 
was destroyed. 

In 219 B.c. Roman agents organized in Saguntum a coup d’etat that set 
up a government patriotically hostile to Carthage. When the Saguntines 
molested tribes friendly to him, Hannibal ordered them to desist; when they 
refused he besieged the city. Rome protested to Carthage and threatened 
war; Carthage replied that since Saguntum was a hundred miles south of the 
Ebro, Rome had no right to interfere, and had, by signing an alliance with 
it, violated her treaty with Hasdrubal. Hannibal persisted in the siege, and 
Rome took up arms again, never dreaming that this Second Punic War was 
to be the most terrible in her history. 

Haniubal spent eight months in subduing the Saguntines; he did not dare 
advance toward Italy while leaving to the Romans so excellent a port for 
landing in his rear. In 2 1 8 he crossed the Ebro, challenging fate as Caesar 
would at the Rubicon. He had an army of 50,000 infantry and 9000 cavalry, 
none of them mercenaries, most of them Spaniards and Libyans. Three thou- 
sand Spaniards deserted when they learned that he planned to cross the 
Alps, and Hannibal released 7000 others who protested against his enter- 
prise as impossible.*^ It was hard enough to force a passage through the 



CHAP. Ill) HANNIBAL AGAINST ROME 49 

Pyrenees; more unexpected was the fierce resistance of some Gallic tribes 
allied with Marseilles; a summer of fighting was required to reach the Rhone, 
and a major battle to cross it. He had hardly left its banks when a Roman 
army arrived at the mouth of the river. 

Hannibal led his troops north toward Vienne and then struck eastward 
into the Alps. Celtic hordes had crossed those ranges before him, and he 
too might have done it without extraordinary hardship had it not been for 
the hostility of the Alpine tribes, and the difficulty of getting his elephants 
through narrow or precipitous passages. Early in September, after a chmb 
of nine days, he reached the summit and found it covered with snow; there 
he let his men and animals rest for two days and then began the downward 
march through passes steeper than the ascent, over roads sometimes buried 
by landslides and often paved with ice. Many soldiers and beasts lost their 
footing and tumbled to their deaths. Hannibal spurred on his despairing 
forces by pointing out to them, in the distant south, the green fields and 
sparkling streams of Italy; that paradise, he promised them, would soon be 
theirs. After seventeen days in the Alps they reached the plain and rested. 
So many men and horses had been lost in the crossing that the army was now 
reduced to 26,000— less than half the force that had left New Carthage four 
months before. Had the Cisalpine Gauls resisted him as the Transalpine Gauls 
had done, Hannibal’s progress might have ended there. But the Boii and 
other tribes welcomed him as a savior and joined him as allies, while the 
recently established Roman settlers fled southward across the Po. 

Faced with this second threat in seven years to the very life of Rome, 
the Senate mobilized all its resources and called upon the states of Italy to 
unite in the defense of their land. With their help Rome raised armies 
totahng 300,000 foot, 14,000 horse, and 456,000 reserves. One army, under 
the first of many famous Scipios, met Hannibal along the Ticino— a small 
river flowing into the Po at Pavia. Hannibal’s Numidian cavalry put the 
Romans to flight, and Scipio, dangerously wounded, was saved by the brave 
interposition of the son who was destined to meet Hannibal again at Zama 
sixteen years later. At Lake Trasimene Hannibal encountered another 
Roman army, 30,000 strong, led by the tribune Caius Flaminius, and accom- 
panied by slave dealers bringing fetters and chains for the prospective 
prisoners whom they hoped to sell. With part of his forces Hannibal de- 
coyed this army into a plain surrounded by hills and woods that concealed 
most of his troops; at his signal the hidden columns debouched upon the 
Romans from every side and killed nearly all of them, including Flaminius 
himself (217). 

Hannibal now controlled all northern Italy, but he knew that he was still 
outnumbered ten to one by a resolute foe. His only hope lay in persuading 



50 CAESAR AND CHRIST (cHAP. Ill 

at least some of the Italian states to revolt against Rome. He released all 
prisoners whom he had taken from Rome’s allies, saying that he had come 
not to fight Italy but to set it free. He marched through flooded Etruria, 
where for four days no diy land could be found on which to pitch a camp; 
crossed the Apennines to the Adriatic, and there allowed his soldiers a 
long interval to refresh their energies and heal their wounds. He himself 
suffered from severe ophthalmia, took no time to treat it, and lost the use 
of one eye. Then he marched down the eastern coast, inviting the Italian 
tribes to join him. None did; on the contrary, every city closed its gates 
against him and prepared to fight. As he moved south, his Gallic allies, inter- 
ested only in their northern homes, began to desert him. Plots against his 
life were so numerous that he had to assume ever new disguises. He begged 
his government to send him supplies and men by some Adriatic port; it 
refused. He asked his younger brother Hasdrubal, whom he had left in 
Spain, to organize an army and cross Gaul and the Alps to join him; but 
the Romans had invaded Spain, and Hasdrubal did not dare to leave it. Ten 
years were to pass before his coming. 

Rome now adopted against her greatest adversary his own baffling policy 
of caution and attrition. Quintus Fabius Maximus, made dictator in 217, 
created an adjective by delaying as long as he could a direct engagement 
with Hannibal; in time, he believed, the invaders would be reduced by 
hunger, discord, and disease. After a year this “masterly inaction” irritated 
the Roman populace; the Assembly overruled the Senate, as well as all 
precedents and logic, by electing Minucius Rufus codictator with Fabius. 
Against Fabius’ advice Minucius advanced against the enemy, fell into a 
trap, was severely beaten, and thereafter understood why Hannibal said 
that he feared Fabius, who would not fight, more than Marcellus, who 
would."® A year later Fabius was deposed, and the Roman armies were 
entrusted to Lucius Aemihus Paulus and Gains Terentius Varro. Paulus 
the aristocrat counseled caution; Varro of the plebs was all for action; and 
as usual, caution lost the argument. Varro sought and found the Carthagin- 
ians at Cannae, in Apufia, some ten miles from the Adriatic coast. The 
Romans had 80,000 infantry, 6000 cavalry; Hannibal had 1 9,000 veterans, 
16,000 unrehable Gauls, 10,000 horse; and he had lured Varro to fight in a 
broad plain ideal for cavalry. He had placed the Gauls at his center, expect- 
ing that they would give way. They did; and when the Romans followed 
them into the pocket, the subtle Carthaginian, himself in the thick of the 
fray, ordered his veterans to close in upon the Roman flanks and bade 
his cavalry smash through the opposed horsemen to attack the legions from 
behind. The Roman army was surrounded, lost all chance of maneuvering, 
and was almost annihilated; 44,000 of them fell, including Paulus and eighty 



51 


CHAP. Ill) HANNIBAL AGAINST ROME 

senators who had enlisted as soldiers; 10,000 escaped to Canusium, among 
them Varro and the Scipio who was to win the surname of Africanus Maior 
(216). Hannibal lost 6000 men, two thirds of them Gauls. It was a supreme 
example of generalship, never bettered in history. It ended the days of 
Roman reliance upon infantry, and set the hnes of military tactics for two 
thousand years. 


V. SCIPIO 

The disaster shattered Rome’s hegemony in southern Italy. Samnites, 
Bruttians, Lucanians, Metapontum, Thurii, Crotona, Locri, and Capua 
joined Cisalpine Gaul in attaching themselves to Hannibal; only Umbria, 
Latium, and Etruria remained firm. Hiero of Syracuse was loyal to the 
death, but his successors declared for Carthage. Phdip V of Macedon, fearful 
of Roman expansion through Illyria into the east, alhed himself with Han- 
nibal and declared war upon Rome. Carthage herself became interested and 
sent Hannibal meager reinforcements and supplies. Some of the young 
Roman nobles among the survivors at Canusium thought the situation hope- 
less and meditated flight to Greece, but Scipio shamed them into courage. 
Rome was for a month hysterical with terror; only a small garrison remained 
to protect it against Hannibal. Matrons of high family ran weeping to the 
temples and cleansed with their hair the statues of the gods; some whose 
husbands and sons had fallen in battle cohabited with foreigners and slaves 
lest their strain should die. To regain the favor of obviously offended 
deities the Senate again sanctioned human sacrifice and buried alive two 
Gauls and two Greeks.-® 

But the Romans, says Polybius, “were most to be feared when they stood 
in real danger. . . . Though they were now so overwhelmingly defeated, 
and their mihtary reputation had been destroyed, yet, by the peculiar virtues 
of their constitution, and by wise counsel, they not only recovered their 
supremacy in Italy . . . but in a few years made themselves masters of 
the world.” The class war ceased, and all groups rushed to the rescue of 
the state. Taxes had already risen apparently beyond tolerance; but now 
the citizens, even widows and children, voluntarily brought their secret 
savings to the Treasury. Every male who could bear arms was called to the 
colors; slaves were accepted in the levies and were promised freedom in 
the event of victory. Not a single soldier would consent to receive pay. 
Rome prepared to contest every inch of ground against the new lion of 
Carthage. 

But Hannibal did not come. His 40,000 men were too small a force, he 
thought, to besiege a city to whose defense many armies would converge 




A 


6 


i 



CAESAR AND CHRIST 


52 


(chap, hi 


from still loyal states; and if he took it, how could he hold it? His Italian 
allies, instead of strengthening, weakened him; Rome and her friends were 
raising forces to attack them, and without his help they would succumb. His 
aides reproached his caution, and one of them remarked, sadly, “The gods 
have not given all their gifts to one man. You know how to win victory, 
Hannibal, but you do not know how to use it.”“® Hannibal decided to wait 
till Carthage, Macedon, and Syracuse could unite with him in a multiple 
offensive that would retake Sicily, Sardinia, Corsica, and Illyria, and 
compel Rome to confine her power to Italy. He released all captives except 
Romans, and offered these to Rome for a small ransom. When the Senate 
refused this he sent most of them to Carthage as slaves, and forced the rest, 
in Roman style, to amuse his men by gladiatorial combats, even to the death. 
He besieged and took several towns and then led his army to winter in Capua. 

It was the most pleasant and dangerous place that he could have chosen. 
For this second city of Italy— some twelve miles north of Naples— had 
learned from the Etruscans and the Greeks the vices as well as the graces 
of civilization; and Hannibal’s troops felt entitled to indulge for a season 
the flesh that had borne so many hardships and wounds. They were never 
again the invincible soldiers who had through many campaigns been formed 
in their master’s Spartan image. In the next five years Hannibal led them to 
some minor successes; but while they were so engaged the Romans laid 
siege to Capua. Hannibal sought to relieve it by marching to within a few 
miles of Rome; the Romans raised twenty-five new legions— 200,000 men— 
and Hannibal, still limited to 40,000, retired to the south. In 2 1 1 Capua fell; 
its leaders, who had let loose a massacre of Romans in the city, were 
beheaded or committed suicide; and the population, which had strongly sup- 
ported Hannibal, was dispersed throughout Italy. A year before, Marcellus 
had taken Syracuse; and a year later Agrigentum yielded to Rome. 

Meanwhile a Roman army under the two older Scipios had been sent to 
Spain to keep Hasdrubal occupied. They defeated him at the Ebro (215); 
but both of them were soon afterward killed in battle, and their gains were 
being lost when their son and nephew, Scipio Africanus, was dispatched 
to the Spanish command. He was but twenty-four, far below the legal age 
for so responsible a position; but the Senate was willing to stretch the 
constitution to save the state, and the Assembly was by this time voluntarily 
subordinating itself to the Senate. The people admired him not only because 
he was handsome and eloquent, intelligent and brave, but pious, courteous, 
and just. It was his custom, before undertaking an enterprise, to commune 
with the gods in the temples on the Capitol, and, after his victories, to 
reward them with hecatombs. He believed— or represented— himself to be 
a favorite of Heaven; his successes spread the belief and filled his followers 



CHAP, m) HANNIBAL AGAINST ROME 53 

with confidence. He soon restored discipline among the troops, captured 
Nova Carthago after a long siege, and scrupulously turned over to the 
Treasury the precious metal and stones that there fell into his hands. Most 
of the Spanish cities surrendered to him, and by 205 Spain had become a 
Roman province. 

Nevertheless, Hasdrubal’s main force had escaped and now crossed Gaul 
and the Alps into Italy. The young leader’s message to Hannibal was inter- 
cepted, and his plan of campaign was revealed to Rome. A Roman army met 
his modest force at the Metaurus River (207) and defeated him despite his 
excellent generalship. Seeing the battle lost and all hope of reaching his 
brother gone, Hasdrubal leaped into the midst of the legions and took death 
in his stride. The Roman historians, perhaps romancing, tell us that the 
victor cut off the youth’s head and sent it through Apulia to be cast over 
the ramparts into Hannibal’s camp. Broken in spirit by the fate of a brother 
whom he had dearly loved, Hannibal withdrew his thinned-out forces to 
Bruttium. “No action was fought with him this year,” says Livy, “nor did 
the Romans care to disturb him, so great was the reputation of his powers 
even while his cause was everywhere round him crumbling into ruin.” 
Carthage sent him a hundred ships laden with men and food, but a gale 
drove the vessels to Sardinia, where a Roman fleet sank or captured eighty 
of them; the rest fled home. 

In 205 young Scipio, fresh from his victories in Spain, was chosen consul, 
raised a new army, and sailed for Africa. The Carthaginian government 
appealed to Hannibal to come to the help of the city that had so long 
refused to support him. How shall we imagine the feelings of the half-blind 
warrior, driven into a comer of Italy by an endless stream of enemies, seeing 
all his toil and hardships of fifteen years brought to nothing, and all his 
triumphs summing up to futility and flight? Half of his troops refused to 
embark with him for Carthage; according to hostile historians he had 20,000 
of them killed for disobedience and for fear that Rome might add them to 
her legions.®" Touching his native soil after an absence of thirty-six years, 
he hastily formed a new army and went out to face Scipio at Zama, fifty 
miles south of Carthage (202). The two generals met in a courteous inter- 
view, found agreement impossible, and joined battle. For the first time in his 
fife Hannibal was defeated; the Carthaginians, mostly mercenaries, gave 
ground before the Roman infantry and the reckless cavalry of Masinissa, the 
Numidian king ; 20,000 Carthaginians were left dead on the field. Hannibal, 
now forty-five, fought with the energy of youth, attacked Scipio in personal 
combat and wounded him, attacked Masinissa, re-formed his disordered 
forces again and again, and led them in desperate countercharges. When 
all hope fled he eluded capture, rode to Carthage, announced that he had 



CAESAR AND CHRIST 


54 


(chap. Ill 


lost not only a battle but the war, and advised the Senate to sue for peace. 
Scipio was generous. He allowed Carthage to retain her African empire but 
demanded the surrender of all her war vessels except ten triremes; she was 
not to make war outside of Africa or within it without Rome’s consent; and 
she was to pay Rome 200 talents ($720,000) every year for fifty years. 
Hannibal pronounced the terms just and persuaded his government to 
accept them. 

The Second Punic War changed the face of the western Mediterranean. 
It gave Spain and all its wealth to Rome, providing the funds for the Roman 
conquest of Greece. It reunited Italy under Rome’s unquestioned mastery 
and threw open all routes and markets to Roman ships and goods. But it 
was the most costly of all ancient wars. It ravaged or injured half the farms 
of Italy, destroyed 400 towns, killed 300,000 men;®^ southern Italy has 
never quite recovered from it to this day. It weakened democracy by show- 
ing that a popular assembly cannot wisely choose generals or direct a war. 
It began the transformation of Roman life and morals by hurting agricul- 
ture and helping trade; by taking men from the countryside and teaching 
them the violence of battle and the promiscuity of the camp; by bringing 
the precious metals of Spain to finance new luxuries and imperialistic ex- 
pansion; and by enabling Italy to live on the extorted wheat of Spain, Sicily, 
and Africa. It was a pivotal event for almost every phase of Roman history. 

To Carthage it was the beginning of the end. With much of its commerce 
and empire left to it, it might have solved the problems of regeneration. But 
the oligarchical government was so corrupt that it threw upon the lower 
classes the burden of raising the annual indemnity for Rome and embezzled 
part of it to boot. The popular party called upon Hannibal to come out of 
his retirement and save the nation. In 196 he was elected suffete. He shocked 
the oligarchs by proposing that the judges of the Court of 104 should be 
elected for one year and should be ineligible for a second term until after 
a year’s interval. When the Senate rejected the measure he brought it be- 
fore the Assembly, and carried it; by this law and this procedure he estab- 
lished at one stroke a degree of democracy equal to Rome’s. He punished 
and checked venahty and pursued it to its source. He relieved the citizens 
of the extra taxes that had been laid upon them, and yet so managed the 
finances that by 188 Carthage was able to pay off the Roman indemnity in 
full. 

To get lid of him the oligarchy secretly sent word to Rome that Han- 
nibal was plotting to renew the war. Scipio used all his influence to protect 
his rival, but was overruled; the Senate accommodated the rich Carthagin- 
ians by demanding the surrender of Hannibal. The old warrior fled by 
night, rode 150 miles to Thapsus, and there took ship to Antioch (195). 



CHAP. Ill) HANNIBAL AGAINST ROME 55 

He found Antiochus III hesitating between war and peace with Rome; 
he advised war and became one of the King’s staff. When the Romans de- 
feated Antiochus at Magnesia (189) they made it a condition of peace that 
Hannibal should be turned over to them. He escaped first to Crete, then 
to Bithynia. The Romans hunted him out and surrounded his hiding place 
with soldiers. Hannibal preferred death to capture. “Let us,” he said, “re- 
lieve the Romans from the anxiety they have so long experienced, since 
they think it tries their patience too much to wait for an old man’s death.” 
He drank the poison that he carried with him, and died, aged sixty-seven, 
in the year 1 84 b.c. A few months later his conqueror and admirer, Scipio, 
followed him to peace. 



CHAPTER IV 


Stoic Rome 

508-202 B.C. 


W HAT kind of human beings were these irresistible Romans? What 
institutions had formed them to such ruthless strength in character 
and policy?— what homes and schools, what religion and moral code? How 
did they take from the soil, and by what economic organization and skill 
did they mold to their uses, the wealth required to equip their growing 
cities and those ever new armies that never knew rest? What were they 
like in their streets and shops, their temples and theaters, their science and 
philosophy, their old age and death? Unless we visualize, scene by scene, 
this Rome of the early Republic, we shall never understand that vast evo- 
lution of customs, morals, and ideas which produced in one age the stoic 
Cato, in a later age the epicurean Nero, and at last transformed the Roman 
Empire into the Roman Church. 


I. THE FAMILY 

Birth itself was an adventure in Rome. If the child was deformed or 
female, the father was permitted by custom to expose it to death.^ Other- 
wise it was welcomed; for though the Romans even of this period prac- 
ticed some measure of family limitation, they were eager to have sons. 
Rural life made children assets, pubhc opinion condemned childlessness, 
and religion promoted fertility by persuading the Roman that if he left no 
son to tend his grave his spirit would suffer endless misery. After eight days 
the child was formally accepted into the family and the clan by a solemn 
ceremony at the domestic hearth. A clan (ge7is) was a group of freeborn 
families tracing themselves to a common ancestor, bearing his name, united 
in a common worship, and bound to mutual aid in peace and war. The 
male child was designated by an individual first name {praenomen), such 
as Publius, Marcus, Caius; by his clan name {nomeii)^ such as Cornelius, 
Tullius, Julius; and by his family name {cogno7nen), such as Scipio, Cicero, 
Caesar. Women were most often designated simply by the clan name— 
Cornelia, Tullia, Claudia, Juha. Since in classical days there were only 

56 



STOIC ROME 


CHAP. IV) 


57 


some fifteen first names for males, and these tended to be repeated con- 
fusingly in many generations of the same family, they were usudly reduced 
to an initial, and a fourth— or even a fifth— name was added for distinctive- 
ness. So P. Cornelius Scipio Africanus Aiaior, the conqueror of Hannibal, 
was differentiated from P. Cornelius Scipio Aemilianus Africanus Minor, 
the destroyer of Carthage. 

The child found itself absorbed into the most basic and characteristic 
of Roman institutions— the patriarchal family. The power of the father 
was nearly absolute, as if the family had been organized as a unit of an 
army always at war. He alone of the family had any rights before the law 
in the early RepubHc; he alone could buy, hold, or sell property, or make 
contracts; even his wife’s dowry, in this period, belonged to him. If his 
wife was accused of a crime she was committed to him for judgment and 
punishment; he could condemn her to death for infidelity or for stealing 
the keys to his wine. Over his children he had the power of life, death, and 
sale into slavery. All that the son acquired became legally his father’s prop- 
erty; nor could he marry without his father’s consent. A married daughter 
remained under her father’s power, unless he allowed her to marry cum 
manu—guvt her into the hand or power of her husband. Over his slaves 
he had unlimited authority. These, and his wife and children, were viancipia 
to him— literally, “taken in hand”; and no matter what their age or status, 
they remained in his power until he chose to emancipate them— to let them 
“out of hand.” These rights of the paterfamilias were checked to some de- 
gree by custom, public opinion, the clan council, and praetorian law; other- 
wise they lasted to his death, and could not be ended by his insanity or 
even by his own choice. Their effect was to cement the unity of the family 
as the basis of Roman morals and government and to establish a discipline 
that hardened the Roman character into stoic strength. They were harsher 
in the letter than in practice; the most extreme of them were seldom used, 
the rest seldom abused. They did not bar a deep and natural pietas, or rever- 
ential affection, between parents and children. The tomb stelae of Rome 
are as tender as those of Greece or our own. 

Since the greater urgency of the male supplies woman wnth charms more 
potent than any law, her status in Rome must not be judged from her legal 
disabilities. She was not allowed to appear in court, even as a witness. Wid- 
owed, she could not claim any dower right in her husband’s estate; he 
might, if he wished, leave her nothing. At every age of her life she was 
under the tutelage of a man— her father, her brother, her husband, her son, 
or a guardian— without whose consent she could not marry or dispose of 
property. On the other hand, she could inherit, though not beyond 100,000 
sesterces ($15,000), and she could own without limit. In many instances. 



58 CAESAR AND CHRIST (cHAP. IV 

as the earlier passed into the later Republic, she became wealthy because 
her husband put his property in her name to escape bankruptcy obligations, 
damage suits, inheritance taxes, and other everlasting jeopardies. She played 
a role in religion as priestess; nearly every priest had to have a wife and 
lost his office when she died. Within the home {domus) she was honored mis- 
tress, mea dojnina^ madame. She was not, like the Greek wife, confined to 
a gynaeceum, or woman’s quarters; she took her meals with her mate, 
though she sat while he recfined. She did a minimum of servile work, for 
nearly every citizen had a slave. She might spin, as a sign of gentility, but 
her chief economic function was to superintend the servants; she made it 
a point, however, to nurse her children herself. They rewarded her patient 
motherhood with profound love and respect; and her husband seldom al- 
lowed his legal mastery to cloud his devotion. 

The father and the mother, their house and land and property, their 
children, their married sons, their grandchildren by these sons, their daugh- 
ters-in-law, their slaves and clients— all these constituted the Roman familia: 
not so much a family as a household; not a kinship group but an assembly 
of owned persons and things subject to the oldest male ascendant. It was 
within this miniature society, containing in itself the functions of family, 
church, school, industry, and government, that the Roman child grew up, 
in piety and obedience, to form the sturdy citizen of an invincible state. 


II. THE RELIGION OF ROME 

I. The Gods 

The Roman family was both an association of persons with things and 
an association of persons and things with gods. It was the center and source 
of religion, as well as of morals, economy, and the state; every part of its 
property and every aspect of its existence were bound up in a solemn in- 
timacy with the spiritual world. The child was taught, by the eloquent 
silence of example, that the undying fire in the hearth was the sign and 
substance of the goddess Vesta, the sacred flame that symbolized the life 
and continuity of the family; which therefore must never be extinguished, 
but must be tended with “religious” care, and fed with a portion of each 
meal. Over the hearth he saw the little icons, crowned with flowers, that 
represented the gods or spirits of the family; the Lar that guarded its fields 
and buildings, its fortune and destiny, and the Penates, or gods of the in- 
terior, who protected the accumulations of the family in its storerooms, 
cupboards, and bams. Hovering invisible but potent over the threshold 



STOIC ROME 


CHAP, iv) 


59 


was the god Janus, two-faced not as deceitful but as watching all entry 
and exit at every door. The child’s father, he learned, was the ward and 
embodiment of an inner genius, or graerative power, which would not die 
with the body, but must be nourished forever at the paternal grave. His 
mother was also the carrier of a deity and liad likewise to be treated as 
divine; she had a ]imo in her as the spirit of her capacity to bear, as the 
father enclosed a genius as the spirit of his power to beget. The child too 
had his genius or ]tmo, as both his guardian angel and his soul— a godly 
kernel in the mortal husk. Everywhere about him, he heard with awe, 
were the watchful Di Manes, or Kindly Shades, of those male forebears 
whose grim death masks hung on the household walls, warning him not to 
stray from the ways of his ancestors, and reminding him that the family 
was composed not merely of those few individuals that lived in his moment 
but also of those that had once been, or would someday be, members of 
it in the flesh, and therefore formed part of it in its spiritual multitude and 
timeless unity. 


Other spirits came to his aid as he grew up; Cuba watched over his sleep, 
Abeona guided his first steps, Fabulina taught him to speak. When he left the 
house he found himself again and everywhere in the presence of gods. The earth 
itself was a deity: sometimes Tellus, or Terra Mater— Mother Earth; sometimes 
Mars as the very soil he trod, and its divine fertility; sometimes Bona Dea, the 
Good Goddess who gave rich wombs to women and fields. On the farm there 
was a helping god for every task or spot: Pomona for orchards, Faunus for 
cattle, Pales for pasturage, Sterculus for manure heaps, Saturn for sowing, Ceres 
for crops, Fornax for baking corn in the oven, Vulcan for making the fire. Over 
the boundaries presided the great god Terminus, imaged and worshiped in the 
stones or trees that marked the limits of the farm. Other religions may have 
looked to the sky, and the Roman admitted that there too were gods; but his 
deepest piety and sincerest propitiations turned to the earth as the source and 
mother of his life, the home of his dead and the magic nurse of the sprouting seed. 
Every December the Lares of the soil were worshiped in the jovful Feast of 
the Crossroads, or Compitalia; every January rich gifts sought the favor of Tellus 
for all planted things; ever)^ May the priests of the Arval (or Plowing) Brother- 
hood led a chanting procession along the boundaries of adjoining farms, gar- 
landed the stones with flowers, sprinkled them with the blood of sacrificial 
victims, and praved to Mars (the earth) to bear generous fruit. So religion sancti- 
fied property, quieted disputes, ennobled the labor of the fields with poetry and 
drama, and strengthened body and soul v'ith faith and hope. 

The Roman did not, like the Greek, think of his gods as having human form; 
he called them simply mnmna, or spirits; sometimes they were abstractions like 
FIcalth, You.h, Memory", Fortune, Honor, Hope, Fear, Virtue, Chastity, Con- 
cord, Victory, or Rome. Some of them, like the Lemures or Ghosts, were spirits 



6o CAESAR AND CHRIST (CHAP. IV 

of disease, hard to propitiate. Some were spirits of the season, like Maia, the soul 
of May; others were water gods like Neptune, or woodland sprites like Silvanus, 
or the gods that dwelt in trees. Some lived in sacred animals, like the sacrificed 
horse or bull, or in the sacred geese that a playful piety preserved unharmed on 
the Capitol. Some were spirits of procreation; Tutumus supervised conception, 
Lucina protected menstruation and delivery. Priapus was a Greek god of fer- 
tility soon domiciled in Rome: maidens and matrons (if we may believe the 
indignant Saint Augustine) sat on the male member of his statue as a means of 
ensuring pregnancy; ^ scandalous figures of him adorned many a garden; little 
phallic images of him were worn by simple persons to bring fertility or good luck 
or to avert the “evil eye.”® Never had a religion so many divinities. Varro 
reckoned them at 30,000, and Petronius complained that in some towns of Italy 
there were more gods than men. But deus, to the Roman, meant saint as well 
as god. 

Under these basic concepts lurked a polymorphous mass of popular be- 
liefs in animism, fetishism, totemism, magic, miracles, spells, superstitions, 
and taboos, most of them going back to tbe prehistoric inhabitants of Italy, 
and perhaps to Indo-European ancestors in their ancient Asiatic home. 
Many objects, places, or persons were sacred {sacer) and therefore taboo 
—not to be touched or profaned: e.g., newborn children, menstruating 
women, condemned criminals. Hundreds of verbal formulas or mechan- 
ical contraptions were used to achieve natural ends by supernatural means. 
Amulets were well-nigh universal; nearly every child wore a bulla, or golden 
talisman, suspended from his neck. Small images were hung upon doors 
or trees to ward off evil spirits. Charms or incantations were used to avert 
accidents, cure disease, bring rain, destroy a hostile army, wither an en- 
emy’s crops or himself. “We are all afraid,” said Pliny, “of being trans- 
fixed by curses and spells.” ^ Witches appear in Horace, Virgil, Tibullus, 
Lucian. They were believed to eat snakes, fly through the air at night, 
brew poisons from esoteric herbs, kill children, and raise the dead. All 
but a few skeptics seem to have believed in miracles and portents, in speak- 
ing or sweating statues,® in gods descending from Olympus to fight for 
Rome, in lucky odd and unlucky even days, and in the presaging of the 
future by strange events. Livy’s history must contain several hundred such 
portents, reported wdth philosophic gravity; and the elder Pliny’s volumes 
so abound in portents and magic cures that they might well have been called 
Supernatural History. The most serious business of commerce, govern- 
ment, or war could be deferred or ended by the priestly announcement of 
an unfavorable omen like abnormal entrails in a sacrificial victim or a roll 
of thunder in the sky. 

The state did what it could to check these excesses— called them, in- 



STOIC ROME 


6l 


CHAP, rv) 


deed, precisely that, superstitio. But it sedulously exploited the piety of 
the people to promote the stability of society and government. It adapted 
the rural divinities to urban hfe, built a national hearth for the goddess 
Vesta, and appointed a college of Vestal Virgins to serve the city’s sacred 
fire. Out of the gods of the family, the farm, and the village it developed 
the di indigetes— or native gods— of the state, and arranged for these a solemn 
and picturesque worship in the name of all the citizens. 

Among these original national gods Jupiter or Jove was the favorite, 
though not yet, like Zeus, their king. In the early centuries of Rome he 
was still a half-impersonal force— the bright expanse of the sky, the light 
of the sun and the moon, a bolt of thunder, or (as Jupiter Pluvius) a shower 
of fertilizing rain; even Virgil and Horace occasionally use “Jove” as a 
synonym for rain or sky.® In time of drought the richest ladies of Rome 
walked in barefoot procession up the Capitoline hill to the Temple of 
Jupiter Tonans— Jove the Thunderer— to pray for rain. Probably his name 
was a corruption of Diuspater, or Diespiter, Father of the Sky. Perhaps 
primitively one with him was Janus, originally Dianus: first the two-faced 
spirit of the cottage door, then of the city gate, then of any opening or 
beginning, as of the day or year. The portals of his temple were open only 
in time of war, so that he might go forth with Rome’s armies to overcome 
the gods of the foe. As old as Jupiter in the respect of the people was Mars, 
at first a god of tillage, then of war, then almost a symbol of Rome; every 
tribe in Italy named a month after him. Of like hoary antiquity was Saturn, 
the national god of the new-sown seed (sata). Legend pictured him as a 
prehistoric king who had brought the tribes under one law, taught them 
agriculture, and established peace and communism in the Saturnia regna— 
the Golden Age of Saturn’s reign. 

Less powerful but more deeply loved than these were the goddesses of 
Rome. Juno Regina was the queen of heaven, the protective genius of wom- 
anhood, marriage, and maternity; her month of June was recommended 
as the luckiest for weddings. Minerva was the goddess of wisdom {mem) or 
memory, of handicrafts and guilds, of actors, musicians, and scribes; the 
Palladium on which the safety of Rome was believed to depend was an 
image of Pallas Minerva, fully armed, which Aeneas was said to have brought 
from Troy through love and war to Rome. Venus was the spirit of desire, 
mating, fertihty; sacred to her was April, the month of opening buds 
(aperire ) ; poets like Lucretius and Ovid saw in her the amorous origin of 
all living things. Diana was the goddess of the moon, of women and child- 
birth, of the hunt, of the woods and their wild denizens, a tree spirit brought 
from Aricia when that region of Latium came under Roman power. Near 
Aricia were the lake and grove of Nemi, and in that grove was a rich shrine 



62 CAESAR AND CHRIST ( CHAP. IV 

of Diana, the resort of pilgrims who believed that the goddess had once 
mated there with Vlrbius, the first “King of the Woods.” To ensure the 
fertility of Diana and the soil, the successors of Virbius— all priests and 
husbands of the huntress— were replaced, each in turn, by any vigorous 
slave who, having taken as a tahsman a sprig of mistletoe (the Golden 
Bough) from the sacred oak tree of the grove, attacked and slew the king 
—a custom that endured till the second century of our era.® 

These, then, were the major gods of the official Roman worship. There 
were lesser, but not less popular, national deities: Hercules, god of joy 
and wine, who was not above gambling gaily for a courtesan with the 
sacristan of his temple; ® Mercury, the patron deity of merchants, orators, 
and thieves; Ops, goddess of wealth; Bellona, goddess of war; and count- 
less more. As the city spread its rule it brought in new divinities— di 7Zo- 
veijsiles. Sometimes it imported the god of a beaten city into the Roman 
pantheon as a sign and surety of conquest, as when the Juno of Veii w^as 
led captive to Rome. Conversely, when the citizens of a community were 
moved to the capital their gods were brought with them, lest the spiritual 
and moral roots of the new inhabitants should be too suddenly snapped 
short; so immigrants bring their gods to America today. The Romans did 
not question the existence of these foreign deities; most of them believed 
that when they led the statue away the god had to come with it; many be- 
lieved that the statue was the god.^* 

But some of the di vovensiles were not conquered but conquering; they 
seeped into Roman worship through commercial, military, and cultural 
contacts with Greek civilization— first in Campania, then in south Italy, 
then in Sicily, finally in Greece itself. There was something cold and im- 
personal in the gods of the state religion; they could be bribed by offer- 
ings or sacrifice, but they could seldom provide comfort or individual in- 
spiration; by contrast the gods of Greece seemed intimately human, full 
of adventure, humor, and poetry. The Roman populace welcomed them, 
built temples for them, and wilfingly learned their ritual. The official priest- 
hood, glad to enlist these new policemen in the service of order and con- 
tent, adopted the Greek gods into the divine family of Rome, and merged 
them, when possible, with their nearest analogues in the indigenous deities. 
As far back as 496 b.c. came Demeter and Dionysus, who were attached 
to Ceres and Liber (god of the grape) ; twelve years later Castor and Pol- 
lux were received, to become the protectors of Rome; in 43 1 a temple was 
raised to Apollo the Healer in the hope that he might allay a plague; in 
294 Aesculapius, the Greek god of medicine, was brought from Epidaurus 
to Rome in the form of a huge snake,“ and a temple-hospital was built 
in his honor on an island in the Tiber. Cronus was accepted as substantially 



STOIC ROME 


CHAP, iv) 


63 


one with Saturn, Poseidon was identified with Neptune, Artemis with 
Diana, Hephaestus with Vulcan, Heracles with Hercules, Hades with Pluto, 
Hermes with Mercury. With the help of the poets Jupiter was elevated into 
another Zeus, a stern witness and guardian of oaths, a bearded judge of 
morals, a custodian of laws, a god of gods; and slowly the educated Ro- 
man was prepared for the monotheistic creeds of Stoicism, Judaism, and 
Christianity. 


2. The Priests 

To appease or enlist the aid of these gods Italy employed an elaborate 
clergy. In his home the father was priest; but public worship was con- 
ducted by several associations— of priests, each filling its own va- 

cancies, but all under the lead of a pontifex maxirmis elected by the cen- 
turies. No special training was necessary for membership in these sacred 
colleges; any citizen might be enrolled in them or leave them; they formed 
no separate order or caste and were politically powerless except as tools 
of the state. They received the income of certain state lands for their sup- 
port, with slaves to serve them; and grew rich through generations of pious 
legacies. 

In the third century before Christ the main pontifical college had nine mem- 
bers. They kept historical annals, recorded laws, took auspices, offered sacrifices, 
and purified Rome with quinquennial lustrations. In performing the official ritual 
the pontiffs were aided by fifteen kindlers of the sacrificial flames. 

Minor pontifical colleges had special functions: the Salii, or Reapers, ushered in 
each New Year with a ritual dance to Mars; the fetiales sanctified the ratification 
of treaties and declarations of war; and the Lnperci, or Brotherhood of the Wolf, 
carried on the strange rites of the Lupercalia. The college of the \"estal Virgins 
tended the state hearth, and sprinkled it daily with holy water from the fountain 
of the sacred nymph Egeria. These white-clad, white-veiled nuns were chosen 
from among girls six to ten years of age; they took a vow of virginitv’^ and service 
for thirty years, but in return they received many public honors and privileges. 
If any of them was found guilty of sexual relations she was beaten with rods and 
buried alive; Roman historians record twelve cases of such punishment. After 
thirty years they were free to leave and marry, but few took or found the 
opportunity.^^ 

The most influential of the priestly colleges was that of the nine mgiires who 
studied the intent or will of the gods, in earlier times by watching the flight of 
birds,* later by examining the entrails of sacrificed animals. Before cvety- im- 

• Hence the words augurs— hlrd carriers (at'cr-gero)— and auspices— hiid inspection (aves- 
spicio). Primitive man may actually have learned to forecast weather through the movements 
of birds. 



64 CAESAR AND CHRIST (CHAP. IV 

portant act of policy, government, or war, the “auspices were taken” by the 
magistrates and interpreted by the augurs, or by special haruspices—Wvtv in- 
spectors— whose art went back through Etruria to Chaldea and beyond. As the 
priests were occasionally open to financial persuasion, their pronouncements 
were sometimes adjusted to the needs of the purchaser; for example, incon- 
venient legislation could be stopped by announcing that the auspices were un- 
favorable for further business on that day; or the Assembly might be induced by 
“favorable” auspices to vote a war.^® In major crises the government professed 
to learn the pleasure of Heaven by consulting the Sibylline Books— the recorded 
oracles of the Sibyl, or priestess of Apollo, at Cumae. Through such means, and 
occasional deputations to the oracle at Delphi, the aristocracy could influence the 
people in any direction to almost any end.^^ 

The ritual of worship aimed merely to offer the gods a gift or sacrifice to win 
their aid or avert their wrath. To be effective, said the priests, the ceremony had 
to be performed with such precision of words and movements as only the clergy 
could manage. If any mistake was made, the rite had to be repeated, even to 
thirty times. Religio meant the performance of ritual with religious care.^® The 
essence of the ceremony was a sacrifice— literally making a thing sacer—i.e., 
belonging to a god. In the home the offering would normally be a bit of cake 
or wine placed on the hearth or dropped into the domestic fire; in the village it 
would be the first fruits of the crops, or a ram, a dog, or a pig; on great occasions, 
a horse, a hog, a sheep, or an ox; on supreme occasions the last three were 
slaughtered together in the su-ove-taur-ilia. Holy formulas pronounced over the 
victim turned it into the god who was to receive it; in this sense the god himself 
was sacrificed; and since only the viscera were burned on the altar, while priests 
and people ate the rest, the strength and glory of the god (men hoped) passed 
into his feasting worshipers. Sometimes human beings were offered in sacrifice; 
it is significant that a law had to be passed as late as 97 b.c. forbidding this. By a 
variant of these ideas of vicarious atonement a man might offer his life for the 
state as the Decii had done, or Marcus Curtius, who, to propitiate angry sub- 
terranean powers, leaped into a chasm that an earthquake had opened in the 
Forum— whereupon, we are told, the chasm closed and all was well.^^ 

Pleasanter was the ceremony of purification. This might be of crops or flocks, 
of an army or a city. A procession made the circuit of the objects to be purified, 
prayer and sacrifice were offered, evil influences were thereby dispelled, and 
misfortune was turned away. Prayer was still imperfectly evolved from magic 
incantations; the words for it— carme?i— meant not only a chart but a charm; 
and Pliny frankly reckoned prayer as a form of magical utterance.^® If the 
formula was properly recited, and was addressed to the correct deity according 
to the indigitamenta, or classified directory of the gods compiled and kept by 
the priests, the request was certain to be granted; if not granted there must have 
been an error in the ritual. Akin to magic were also the vota, or vowed offerings, 
with which the people sought to gain the help of the gods; sometimes great 
temples rose in fulfillment of such vows. The multitude of votive offerings found 



STOIC ROME 


CHAP. IV) 


65 


in Roman remains suggests that the religion of the people was warm and tender 
with piety and gratimde, a feeling of kinship with the hidden forces in nature, 
and an anxious desire to be in harmony with them all. By contrast the state 
religion was uncomfortably formal, a kind of legal and contractual relation 
beuveen the government and the gods. When new cults flowed in from the con- 
quered East it was this official worship that declined first, while the picturesque 
and intimate faith and ritual of the countryside patiently and obstinately sur- 
vived. Victorious Christianity, half surrendering, wisely took over much of 
the faith and ritual; and, under new forms and phrases, they continue in the 
Latin world to this day. 


S. Festivals 


If the official worship was gloomy and severe, its festivals redeemed it, 
and showed men and gods in a lighter mood. The year was adorned with 
over a hundred holy days (feriae), including the first of every month and 
sometimes the ninth and fifteenth. Some of the feme were sacred to the 
dead or to the spirits of the lower world; these were “apotropaic” in their 
ceremonies, aiming to app ease the departed and turn away wrath. On May 
11-13 Roman families commemorated with awe the feast of the Levmres, 
or dead souls; the father spat black beans from his mouth, and cried: “With 
these beans I redeem myself and mine. . . . Shades of my ancestors, de- 
part!” The Parentalia and the Feralia, in February, were similar attempts 
to propitiate the fearsome dead. But for the most part the festivals were 
occasions of feasting and jollity, often, among the plebs, of sexual freedom; 
on such days, says a character in Plautus, “you may eat what you like, go 
where you like . . . and love whom you like, provided you abstain from 
wives, widows, virgins, and free boys”;^® apparently he felt that a wide 
choice would still remain. 


On February 1 5 came the strange Lupercalia, sacred to the God Faunus as 
averter of wolves {luperctis): goats and sheep were sacrificed; and the luperci 
—priests clad only in goatskin girdles— ran around the Palatine praying to Faunus 
to drive away evil spirits, and striking the women whom they encountered with 
thongs of hide from the sacrificed animals, to purify them and make them fertile; 
then puppets of straw were cast into the Tiber to appease or deceive the river 
god, who had perhaps, in wilder days, demanded living men. On March 15 the 
poor emerged from their hovels and, like the Jews on the Feast of Tabernacles, 
built themselves tents in the Field of Mars, celebrated the coming of the New 
Year, and prayed to the goddess Anna Perenna (Ring of the Years) for as many 
years as they quaffed cups of wine.^^ April alone had six festivals, culminating 
in the Floralia; this Feast of Flora, goddess of flowers and springs, continued 
for six days of bibulous and promiscuous revelrx'. The first of May was the 
Feast of the Good Goddess, Bona Dea. On May 9, 1 1, and 1 3 Liber and Libera, 



66 CAESAR AND CHRIST (CHAP. IV 

god and goddess of the grape, were celebrated in the Liberalia; the phallus, 
symbol of fertility, was frankly honored by gay crowds of men and women.^® 
At the end of May the Arval Brethren led the people in the solemn and yet 
joyful Ambarvalia. The gods were neglected in the autumn months, after the 
crops were safely in, but December was again rich in feasts. The Saturnalia ran 
from the 17th to the 23rd; they celebrated the sowing of the seed for the next 
year and commemorated the happy classless reign of Saturn; gifts were ex- 
changed, and many liberties were allowed; the distinction between slave and 
free was for a while abolished or even inverted; slaves might sit down with 
their owners, give orders to them, rail at them; the masters waited upon their 
slaves, and did not eat till all the slaves were filled.-'* 

These festivals, though agricultural in origin, remained popular in the 
cities and survived through all vicissitudes of belief into the fourth and fifth 
centuries of our era. Their number was so confusing that one of the prime 
purposes of the Roman calendar was to list them for the guidance of the 
people. In early Italian custom the chief priest had convened the citizens 
at the beginning of every month and named the festivals to be observed 
in the next thirty days; this calling (calatio) gave a name {caletidae) to 
the first day of each month. To the Romans, as in some measure to modem 
Catholics or orthodox Jews, a calendar meant a priestly list of holidays 
and business days, interspersed with scraps of sacred, legal, historical, and 
astronomical information. Tradition ascribed to Numa the calendar that 
governed Roman chronology and life till Caesar. It divided the year into 
twelve lunar months, with complex intercalations that summed up to an 
average of 366 days per year. To remedy the mounting excess the pontiffs 
were empowered (191 b.c.) to revise the intercalations; but they used their 
authority to lengthen or shorten magistracies pleasing or displeasing to 
them, so that by the end of the Republic the calendar, then three months 
amiss, was a monster of chaos and chicanery. 

In the early days time had been measured simply by the height of the 
sun in the sky. In 263 b.c. a sundial was brought from Catana, in Sicily, 
and placed in the Forum; but as Catana was four degrees south of Rome, 
the dial was deceptive, and the priests were for a century unable to make 
the needed adjustments. In 158 b.c. Scipio Nasica set up a public clepsydra, 
or water clock. The month was divided into three periods by the kalends 
(first), the nones (fifth or seventh), and the ides (thirteenth or fifteenth); 
and the days were clumsily named by their distance before these dividing 
lines; so March 1 2 was “the third day before the ides of March.” A loose 
economic week was marked out by the nundiriae, or every ninth dav, when 
the villagers came to market in the towns. The year began with the com- 
ing of spring, and the first month, Martius, bore the name of the god of 



STOIC ROME 


CHAP, iv) 


< 5 ? 


sowing; next came Aprilis, sprouting; Maius, month of Maia, or perhaps 
of increase; lunius, month of Juno, or possibly of thriving; then Quinctilis, 
Sextilis, September, October, November, and December, named from their 
numerical .order in the year; then January for Janus, and February for 
the jebma, or magic objects by which persons might be purified. The year 
itself was called anmis, ring; as if to say that in reality there is no begin- 
ning and no end. 


4. Religio7i and Character 

Did this religion help Roman morals? In some ways it was immoral: 
its stress on ritual suggested that the gods rewarded not goodness but gifts 
and formulas; and its prayers were nearly always for material goods or 
martial victory. Ceremonies gave drama to the life of man and the soil, 
but they multiplied as if they, and not the devotion of the part to the 
whole, were the proper essence of religion. The gods were, with some 
exceptions, awesome spirits without moral aspect or nobility. 

Nevertheless, the old religion made for morality, for order and strength 
in the individual, the family, and the state. Before the child could learn 
to doubt, faith molded its character into discipline, duty, and decency. 
Religion gave divine sanctions and support to the family: it instilled in 
parents and children a mutual respect and piety never surpassed, it gave 
sacramental significance and dignity to birth and death, encouraged fidelity 
to the marriage vow, and promoted fertility by making parentage indispen- 
sable to the peace of the dead soul. By ceremonies sedulously performed 
before each campaign and battle it raised the soldier’s morale, and led him 
to believe that supernatural powers were fighting on his side. It strengthened 
law by giving it celestial origins and religious form, by making crime a 
disturbance of the order and peace of Heaven, and by placing the author- 
ity of Jove behind every oath. It invested every pfiase of public life with 
religious solemnity, prefaced every act of government with ritual and 
prayer, and fused the state into such intimate union with the gods that 
piety and patriotism became one, and love of country rose to a passion 
stronger than in any other society known to history. Religion shared with 
the family the honor and responsibility of forming that iron character which 
was the secret of Rome’s mastery of the world. 


III. MOR.'tLS 

What kind of morality emerged from this life in the family and among 
the gods? Roman literature, from Ennius to Juvenal, idealized these earlier 



68 CAESAR AND CHRIST (cHAP. IV 

generations and mourned the passing of ancient simplicity and virtue. These 
pages too will suggest a contrast between the stoic Rome of Fabius and 
the epicurean Rome of Nero, But the contrast must not be exaggerated 
by a biased selection of the evidence. There were epicureans in Fabius’ days 
and stoics in Nero’s. 

From beginning to end of Roman history the sexual morality of the 
common man remained essentially the same: coarse and free, but not in- 
compatible with a successful family hfe. In all free classes virginity was 
demanded of young women, and powerful tales were told to exalt it; for 
the Roman had a strong sense of property and wanted a wife of such steady 
habits as would reasonably ensure him against leaving his goods to his 
rival’s breed. But in Rome, as in Greece, premarital unchastity in men 
was not censured if it preserved a decent respect for the hypocrisies of 
mankind. From the elder Cato to Cicero we find express justifications 
of it. What increases with civilization is not so much immorality of intent 
as opportunity of expression. In early Rome prostitutes were not numerous. 
They were forbidden to wear the matron’s robe that marked the reputable 
wife, and were confined to the dark comers of Rome and Roman society. 
There were as yet no educated courtesans hke the hetairai of Athens, nor 
such delicate drabs as posed for Ovid’s verse. 

Men married early— usually by twenty; not through romantic love but 
for the sound purposes of having a helpmate, useful children, and a healthy 
sexual hfe. In the words of the Roman wedding ceremony, marriage was 
liberum quaerendorum causa— iot the sake of getting children; on the farm, 
children, hke wives, were economic assets, not biological toys. Marriages 
were often arranged by the parents and engagements were sometimes made 
for couples in their infancy. In every case the consent of both fathers was 
required. Betrothal was formal and constituted a legal bond. The relatives 
gathered in a feast to wimess the contract; a stipula, or straw, was broken 
between the parties as a sign of their agreement; the stipulations— especially 
those concerning the dowry— were put in writing; and the man placed an 
iron ring upon the fourth finger of the girl’s left hand, because it was 
believed that a nerve ran thence to the heart.-® The minimum age for 
legal marriage was twelve for the girl, fourteen for the man. Early Roman 
law made marriage compulsory;^^ but this law must have become a dead 
letter by 413 b.c., when Camillus as censor imposed a tax on bachelors. 

Marriage was either cu?n jmnu or sme with or without the hand- 

ing over of the bride and her possessions to the authority of the husband 
or the father-in-law. Marriage sme 7nanu dispensed with religious cere- 
mony and required only the consent of the bride and groom. Marriage 
cum mami was by usus—tl year’s cohabitation; or by purchase; 



STOIC ROME 


CHAP, IV) 


69 


or by confarreatio (literally, eating a cake together), which required re- 
ligious ceremony and was confined to patricians. Marriage by actual pur- 
chase disappeared at an early date, or was reversed; the bride’s dowry often 
in effect bought the man. This dowry was usually at the husband’s dis- 
posal, but its equivalent had to be returned to the wife in divorce or on 
the death of the male. Weddings were rich in folk ceremony and song. 
The two families feasted in the home of the bride; then they marched in col- 
orful and frolicsome procession to the home of the groom’s father, to an 
accompaniment of flutes, hymeneal chants, and Rabelaisian raillery. At the 
garlanded door the bridegroom asked the girl, “Who art thou?” and she 
answered with a simple formula of devotion, equality, and unity: “Where 
thou art Caius, there am I Caia.” He lifted her over the threshold, pre- 
sented her with the keys of the house, and put his neck with hers under 
a yoke to signify their common bond; hence marriage was called coniugium 
—a yoking together. In token of her joining the new family the bride then 
took part with the others in worshiping the household gods. 

Divorce was difficult and rare in marriages by conjarreatio; marriages 
cum marm could be dissolved only by the husband; in marriage sine Tnanm 
divorce was open to either party at will, without asking consent of the 
state. The first recorded divorce in Roman history is dated 268 b.c.; a sus- 
picious tradition claimed that no divorce had previously occurred since the 
foundation of the city.^® Clan custom requmed a husband to divorce an 
unfaithful or childless wife. “If you find your wife in the act of adultery,” 
said old Cato, “the law permits you to kill her without trial. If by chance 
she surprises you in the same condition she must not touch you even with 
the tips of her fingers; the law forbrds her.” Despite these distinctions 
there were apparently many happy marriages. The tombstones abound in 
post-mortem affection. One honored touchingly a lady who had served 
two husbands well: 


Thou wert beautiful beyond measure, Statilia, and true to thy 
husbands! ... He who came first, had he been able to withstand 
the fates, would have set up this stone to thee; while I, alas, who 
have been blessed by thy pure heart these sixteen years, now have 
lost thee.®® 

The young women of early Rome were probably not quite so pretty 
as the later ladies whom the experienced Catullus would credit with laneiim 
latusculmn ijtanusque moUtcellas — “little sides as smooth as wool, and soft 
little hands.” Presumably in those rural days toil and care soon overlaid 
this adolescent loveliness. Feminine features were classically regular, nose 
small and thin, hair and eyes usually dark. Blondes were at a premium, as 



CAESAR AND CHRIST 


70 


(chap. IV 


were the German dyes that made them. As for the Roman male, he was 
impressive rather than handsome. A stem education and years of military 
hfe, hardened his face, as later indulgence would soften it into flabbiness. 
Cleopatra must have loved Antony for something else than his wine-puffed 
cheel's, and Caesar for some other charm than his eagle’s head and nose. 
The Roman nose was like the Roman character— sharp and devious. Beards 
and long hair were customary till about 300 b.c., when barbers began to 
ply their trade in Rome. Dress was essentially like the Greek. Boys, girls, 
magistrates, and the higher priests wore the toga praetexta, or purple-fringed 
robe; on attaining his sixteenth birthday the youth changed to the toga 
virilis— the white robe of manhood— as a symbol of his right to vote in the 
assemblies and his duty to serve in the army. Women wore, indoors, a 
dress (stola) bound with a girdle under the breasts, and reaching to the 
feet; outdoors they covered this with a palla, or cloak. Indoors, men wore 
a simple tunica, or shirt; outdoors they added a toga, and sometimes a cloak. 
The toga (tegere, to cover) was a woolen garment in one piece, twice 
the width and thrice in length the height of the wearer. It was wrapped 
around the body, and the surplus was thrown back over the left shoulder, 
brought forward under the right arm, and again thrown over the left shoul- 
der. The folds at the breast served as pockets; the right arm remained free. 

The Roman male cultivated a severe dignity (gravitas) as an uncom- 
fortable necessity in an aristocracy that ruled a people, then a peninsula, 
then an empire. Sentiment and tenderness belonged to private hfe; in pubhc 
a man of the upper classes had to be as stem as his statue, and hide behind 
a mask of austere calm the excitability and humor that cry out not only in 
the comedies of Plautus but in the speeches of Cicero. Even in private life 
the Roman of this age was expected to live Spartanly. Luxury of dress or 
table was reproved by the censor; even negligent tillage could bring some 
Cato down upon the farmer’s head. In the First Punic War the Carthagin- 
ian ambassadors, returning from Rome, amused the rich merchants by tell- 
ing how the identical set of silver plate had appeared in every house to 
which they had been invited; one set, secretly passed about, had sufficed 
the whole patriciate. In that age the Senate sat on hard wooden benches 
in a curia, or hall, never heated even in winter. 

Nevertheless, between the First and Second Punic Wars, wealth and 
luxury made a good beginning. Hannibal gathered a peck of gold rings 
from the fingers of Romans slain at Cannae;®^ and sumptuary laws repeat- 
edly— therefore vainly— forbade ornate jewelry, fancy dress, and costly 
meals. In the third century b.c. the menu of the average Roman was still 
simple: breakfast (ientaczdum) of bread with honey or olives or cheese; 
Itmcheon (prandium) and dinner (cena) of grains, vegetables, and fruit; 



STOIC ROME 


71 


CHAP. IV) 

only the rich ate fish or meat.®® Wine, usually diluted, graced nearly every 
table; to drink undiluted wine was considered intemperance. Festivals and 
banquets were a necessary relaxation in this stoic age; those who could not 
unbend to them became too tense, and showed their nervous fatigue in the 
portrait statues they left to posterity. 

Charity found little scope in this frugal life. Hospitality survived as a 
mutual convenience at a time when inns were poor and far between; but 
the sympathetic Polybius reports that “in Rome no one ever gives away 
anything to anyone if he can help it” ®*— doubtless an exaggeration. The 
young were kind to the old, but in general the graces and courtesies of life 
came to Rome only with the dying Republic. War and conquest molded 
morals and manners and left men often coarse and usually hard, prepared 
to kill without compunction and be killed without complaint. War cap- 
tives were sold into slavery by the thousands, unless they were kings or 
generals; these were usually slaughtered at the victor’s triumph or allowed 
to starve leisurely to death. In the business world these qualities took on 
a fairer aspect. The Romans loved money, but Polybius (about 160 b.c.) 
describes them as industrious and honorable men; a Greek, said the Greek, 
could not be prevented from embezzling, no matter how many clerks were 
set to watch him, while the Romans spent great sums of public money with 
only rare cases of ascertained dishonesty.®® We note, however, that a law 
to check malpractice at elections was passed in 432 b.c. Roman historians 
report that political integrity was at its height in the first three centuries 
of the Republic; but they arouse suspicion by their high praise of Valerius 
Corvus, who, after occupying twenty-one magistracies, returned to his 
fields as poor as he had come; of Curius Dentatus, who kept no part of 
the spoils he had taken from the enemy; and of Fabius Pictor and his 
associates, who handed over to the state the rich presents they had received 
on an embassy to Egypt. Friends lent one another substantial amounts 
without interest. The Roman government was guilty of frequent treach- 
ery in dealing with other states, and perhaps in foreign relations the Empire 
was more honorable than the Republic. But the Senate refused to connive 
at the poiso nin g of Pyrrhus, and warned him of the plot. When, after Cannae, 
Hannibal sent ten prisoners to Rome to negotiate for the ransom of 8000 
others, and drew from them a promise to return, all but one kept their word; 
the Senate apprehended the tenth, put him in irons, and turned him over 
to Hannibal, whose joy at his victory, says Polybius, “was not so great as 
his dejection when he saw how steadfast and high-spirited the Romans 
were.” 

In summary, the typical educated Roman of this age was orderly, con- 
servative, loyal, sober, reverent, tenacious, severe, practical. He enjoyed 



72 CAESAR AND CHRIST ( CHAP. IV 

discipline, and would have no nonsense about liberty. He obeyed as a train- 
ing for command. He took it for granted that the government had a right 
to inquire into his morals as well as his income, and to value him purely 
according to his services to the state. He distrusted individuality and genius. 
He had none of the charm, vivacity, and unstable fluency of the Attic 
Greek. He admired character and will as the Greek admired freedom and 
intellect; and organization was his forte. He lacked imagination, even to 
make a mythology of his own. He could with some effort love beauty, but 
he could seldom create it. He had no use for pure science, and was sus- 
picious of philosophy as a devilish dissolvent of ancient beliefs and ways. 
He could not, for the life of him, understand Plato, or Archimedes, or 
Christ. He could only rule the world. 


rv. LETTERS 

The Roman was formed not only by the family, the religion, and the 
moral code, but, in less degree, by the school, the language, and the Htera- 
ture. Plutarch dates the first Roman school about 250 b.c.;®® but Livy, per- 
haps romancing, describes Virginia, the desired of the Decemvir, as “going 
to a grammar school in the Forum” as early as 450.®® The demand for 
written laws, and the pubhcation of the Twelve Tables, suggest that by 
that date a majority of the citizens could read. 

The teacher was usually a slave or freedman, employed by several fam- 
ilies to instruct their children, or setting up his own private school and 
taking any pupil that came. He taught reading, writing, grammar, arith- 
metic, history, and obedience; moral education was fundamental and un- 
ceasing; disciple and disciphne were almost the same word. Memory and 
character ahke were trained by memorizing the Twelve Tables of the law. 
Heine remarked that “the Romans would not have had much time left 
for conquering the world if they had first had to learn Latin” but they 
too had to conjugate irregular Latin verbs, and soon would be put to Greek. 
The boy familiarized himself, through poetry and prose, with the exploits 
of his country and its heroes, and received many a patriotic lesson conveyed 
through edifying episodes that had never occurred. No attention was given 
to athletics; the Romans thought it better to train and harden the body 
by useful work in the field or the camp rather than through contests in 
the palaestra or gymnasium. 

The language, hke the people, was practical and economical, martially 
sharp and brief; its sentences and clauses marched in disciplined subordina- 



STOIC ROME 


CHAP, iv) 


73 


tion to a determined goal. A thousand similarities allied it, within the Indo- 
European family, with Sanskrit and Greek and the Celtic tongues of an- 
cient Gaul, Wales, and Ireland. Latin was poorer than Greek in imagery, 
flexibility, and ready formation of compounds; Lucretius and Cicero com- 
plained of its limited vocabulary, its lack of subtle shadings. Nevertheless, 
it had a sonorous splendor and masculine strength that made it ideal for 
oratory, and a compactness and logical sentence form that made it an apt 
vehicle for Roman law. The Latin alphabet came from Euboean Chalcis 
via Cumae and Etruria.^^ In the oldest Latin inscription known to us, 
ascribed to the sixth century b.c., all the letters are Greek in form. C was 
sounded like our K, J like Y, V like U or W, the vowels as in Italian, 
Caesar’s contemporaries knew him as Yooleoos Keyssar, and Cicero was 
Keekero. 


The Romans wrote in ink with a slit metal reed (cala?>ms, stilus), at first upon 
leaves (folia), whence our words folio and leaf (two pages); then upon strips 
of inner bark (liber)-, often upon white (album) tablets of waxed wood; later 
upon leather, linen paper, and parchment. As the written forms of Latin resisted 
change more than the spoken words, the language of literature diverged more 
and more from the speech of the people, as in modem America or France. The 
melodious Romance languages— Italian, Spanish, Portuguese, French, and Ru- 
manian-evolved from the crude popular Latin brought to the provinces, not 
by poets and grammarians, but by soldiers, merchants, and adventurers. So the 
words for horse in the Romance languages— cavallo, cheval, cal— were 
taken from the spoken Latin caballus, not from the written equiis. In popular 
Latin ille (he) was one syllable, like French and Italian il; and final -s and -m 
were, as in those languages, dropped or not pronounced. The best came from 
a corruption of the worst: corniptio pessimi optima. 

What literature did the young Roman read in those first three centuries of 
the Republic? There were religious hymns and chants, such as the song of the 
Arval Ilrethren, and there were popular lays of Rome’s historic or legendary 
past. There were official— usually priestly— records of elections, magistracies, 
events, portents, and holidays.* On the basis of these archives Q. Fabius Pictor 
compiled (202 b . c .) a respectable History of Rome— hut in Greek; Latin was 
not yet thought fit for literary prose and was not used by historians until Cato. 
There were farragoes of prose called saturae— medleys of merry nonsense and 
erotic banter— out of which Lucilius would forge a new form for Horace and 
Juvenal. There were boisterously obscene burlesques or mimes, usually acted 
by players from Etruria; some of these performers, coming from the town of 
Istria, were named istriones, and gave the word histrio (actor) to Latin, and its 


Fasti considares, libri magistratuum, annales maximi, fasti calendares. 



74 


CAESAR AND CHRIST 


(chap. IV 

derivatives to modem tongues. There were also, on holidays or market days, 
crude, half-impromptu farces that gave their stock characters to thousands of 
Italian comedies, ancient and modern: the rich and stupid father, the extrava- 
gant love-entangled youth, the maligned virgin, the clever intriguing servant, 
the glutton always maneuvering for a meal, the rollicking, tumbling clown. Al- 
ready the last flaunted the gaily colored patches, the long expansive trousers, 
the large-sleeved doublet, and the shorn head, still familiar to our youth. An 
exact likeness of Punchinello, or Punch, has been found on the frescoes of 
Pompeii.^ 

Literature came formally to Rome about 272 b.c. in the person of a Greek 
slave. In that year Tarentum fell; many of its Greek citizens were slaugh- 
tered, but Livius Andronicus had the luck to be merely enslaved. Brought 
to Rome, he taught Latin and Greek to his master’s children and some others, 
and translated the Odyssey for them into Latin “Saturnian” verse— lines of 
loose and irregular rhythm, scanned by accent rather than quantity. Freed 
for his services, he was commissioned by the aediles to produce a tragedy 
and a comedy for the ludi, or games, of 240 b.c. He composed them on 
Greek models, directed them, acted the main parts, and sang them to the 
accompaniment of a flute till his voice gave out; then he had another sing 
the lines while he acted them— a method followed in many later plays at 
Rome, and influential in generating the pantomime. The government was 
so well pleased by this introduction of the literary drama that in honor of 
Andronicus it gave poets the right to incorporate, and allowed them to 
hold their meetings in the Temple of Minerva on the Aventine. Henceforth 
it became the fashion to present such ludi scenici, or scenic plays, at the 
public festivals.^^ 

Five years after this historic premiere a plebeian ex-soldier from Cam- 
pania, Cnaeus Naevius, shocked the conservatives by producing a comedy 
in which he satirized with Aristophanic freedom the political abuses that 
were flourishing in the capital. The old families complained, and Naevius 
was jailed. He apologized and was freed, wrote another satire as sharp a 
the first, and was banished from Rome. In exile and old age he composed, 
with undiscourageable patriotism, an epic poem on the First Punic War, 
in which he had fought; it began with the founding of Rome by Trojan 
refugees, and provided Virgil with a theme and several scenes. His con- 
demnation was a double misfortune; the vitality and originality of Roman 
comedy suffered from a censorship that made libel a capital crime, and 
Roman politics lost the purge of a public critique. Naevius wrote also a 
poetic drama based on Roman history; this experiment too ended with 
him, and thereafter Roman tragedy circled vainly in the cropped pastures 



STOIC ROME 


CHAP, iv) 


75 


of Greek myth. Only a few fragments survive to reveal Naevius’ quality. 
One describes a coquettish girl: 


As if playing ball in a ring she skips from one to another, and is 
all things to all men with her words and winks, her caresses and em- 
braces; now a squeeze of the hand or a pressure of the foot; her ring 
to look at, her lips to blow an inviting kiss; here a song, there the lan- 
guage of signs.^^ 

It is pleasant to see that women were then as charming as now, that not 
all Romans were Catos, and that under the shadow of the Porch even virtue 
might take a holiday. 


Beyond the essentials of arithmetic, and enough geometry to plot a 
farm or plan a temple, science played as yet no part in the education or 
culture of the Roman citizen. The boy counted on his fingers (digita), 
and the figures he used were imitations of an extended digit (I), a hand 
(V), or two hands joined at their apexes (X); and he was content to form 
the other numerals by repeating these symbols (II, III), and prefixing (IV, 
IX) or suffixing (VI, XII) digits to V or X to lessen or increase them. 
Out of this manual arithmetic came the decimal system, constructed on 
parts and multiples of ten— i.e., .the ten fingers. The Romans used geometry 
well in building and engineering, but added not one theorem to that rounded 
achievement of the Greek mind. We hear nothing of Roman astronomy 
in this period except in its blundering calendar and its prosperous sister 
or mother— astrology. 

Medicine, till the third century, was largely a matter of family herbs, 
magic, and prayer; the gods alone could heal; and to make cure certain 
a special god was invoked for each disease as one now invokes a spe- 
cialist. Against the mosquitoes of the Roman campagna appeal was made 
to the goddesses Febris and Mephitis, as, until our century, the Romans 
petitioned La Aladoiim della Febbre, Our Lady of the Fever.^® Healing 
shrines and sacred waters were as common as today. The temple of Aescu- 
lapius was a busy center of religious healing, where diet and hydrotherapy, 
peaceful surroundings and a quiet routine, prayer and the soothing ritual 
of worship, the aid of practical physicians and the cheerfulness of skilled 
attendants, conspired to restore confidence and to effect apparently miracu- 
lous cures.*^ Nevertheless, there were slave doctors and quacks in Rome 
five centuries before Christ; and some of these practiced dentistry, for the 
Twelve Tables forbade the burial of gold with the dead except where 
gold had been used to wire teeth."*® In 219 we hear of the first freeman 
physician in Rome— Archagathus the Peloponnesian. His surgical opera- 



CAESAR AND CHRIST 


76 


(chap. IV 


tions so delighted the patricians that the Senate voted him an official resi- 
dence and the freedom of the city; later his “mania for cutting and burning” 
won him the name of Camifex, butcher.*® From that time onward Greek 
physicians flocked to Rome, and made the practice of medicine there a 
Greek monopoly. 


V. THE GROWTH OF THE SOIL 

The Roman of those centuries had little need of medicine, for his active 
life in farming or soldiering kept him healthy and strong. He took to the 
land as the Greek to the sea; he based his life on the soil, built his towns 
as meeting places for farmers and their products, organized his armies and 
his state on his readiness to defend and extend his holdings, and conceived 
his gods as spirits of the living earth and the nourishing sky. 

As far back as we can reach into Rome’s past we find private property.®® 
Part of the land, however, was ager public acreage usually acquired 

by conquest and owned by the state. The peasant family of the early Republic 
owned two or three acres, tilled them with all hands and occasionally a slave, 
and lived abstemiously on the product. They slept on straw,®* rose early, stripped 
to the waist,®® and plowed and harrowed behind leisurely oxen whose droppings 
served as fertilizer, and their flesh as a religious offering and a festival food. 
Human offal was also used to enrich the soil, but chemical fertilizers were rare 
in Italy before the Empire. Manuals of scientific agriculture were imported from 
Carthage and Greece. Crops were rotated between grains and legumes, and 
lands were turned periodically to pasturage to prevent their exhaustion. Veg- 
etables and fruits Avere grown in abundance, and formed, next to grains, the 
chief articles of food. Garlic w'as already a favorite seasoning. Some aristocratic 
families derived their names in part from the vegetables traditionally favored 
in their plantings: Lentuli, Caepiones, Fabii, from lentils, onions, beans. Culture 
of the fig, olive, and grape gradually encroached upon cereal and vegetable 
crops. Olive oil took the place of butter in the diet and of soap in the bath; 
it served as fuel in torches and lamps and was the chief ingredient in the unguents 
made necessary for hair and skin by the dry winds and fiery sun of the Medi- 
terranean summer. Sheep were the favorite herd, for the Italians preferred cloth- 
ing of wool. Swine and poultry were raised in the farmyard, and almost every 
family nursed a garden of flowers.®* 

War transformed this picture of rural toil. Many of the farmers who 
changed plowshares for SAvords were overcome by the enemy or the tOAvri 
and never returned to their fields; many others found their holdings so 
damaged by armies or neglect that they had not the courage to begin anexv; 
others were broken by accumulated debt. Such men sold their lands at 



STOIC ROME 


CHAP. IV) 


77 


depression prices to aristocrats or agricultural capitalists who merged the 
little homesteads into latijimdia (literally, broad farms), turned these vast 
areas from cereals to flocks and herds, orchards and vines, and manned them 
with war-captured slaves under an overseer who was often himself a slave. 
The owners rode in now and then to look at their property; they no longer 
put their hands to the work, but lived as absentee landlords in their sub- 
urban villas or in Rome. This process, already under way in the fourth 
century b.c., had by the end of the third produced a debt-ridden tenant 
class in the countryside, and in the capital a propertyless, rootless proletariat 
whose sullen discontent would destroy the Repubhc that peasant toil had 
made. 


VI. INDUSTRY 

The soil was poor in minerals— a fact that would write much economic and 
political history in Italy. There was no gold and little silver; there was a fair 
supply of iron, some copper, lead, tin, and zinc, but too scarce to support an 
industrial development. The state owned all mines in the empire, but leased 
them to private operators, who worked them profitably by using up the lives 
of thousands of slaves. Metallurgy and technology made few advances. Bronze 
was still employed more frequently than iron, and only the best and latest mines 
were equipped with the winches, windlasses, and chain buckets that Archimedes 
and others had set up in Sicily and Egypt. The chief fuel was wood; trees were 
cut also for houses and ships and furniture; mile by mile, decade by decade, the 
forest retreated up the mountainside to meet the timber line. The most pros- 
perous industry was the manufacture of weapons and tools in Campania. There 
was no factory system, except for armament and pottery. Potters made not only 
dishes but bricks and tiles, conduits and pipes; at Arretium and elsewhere the 
potters were copying Greek models and learning to make artistic wares. As 
early as the sixth century the textile industry, in the design, preparation, and 
dyeing of linen and wool, had grown beyond the domestic stage despite the 
busy spinning of daughters, wives, and slaves; free and unfree weavers were 
brought together in small factories, which produced not only for the local mar- 
ket but also for export trade. 

Industrial production for nonlocal consumption was arrested by difficulties 
of transport. Roads were poor, bridges unsafe, oxcarts slow, inns rare, robbers 
plentiful. Hence traffic moved bv choice along canals and rivers, while coastal 
towns imported by sea rather than from their hinterland. By 202, however, 
the Romans had built three of their great “consular roads”— so called because 
usually named after the consuls or censors xvho began them. Soon these high- 
ways would far surpass in durability and extent the Persian and Carthaginian 
roads that had sensed them as models. The oldest of them was the via Latina 
which, about 370 b.c., brought Romans out to the Alban hills. In 312 Appius 



CAESAR AND CHRIST 


78 


(chap. IV 


Claudius the Blind, with the labor of thousands of criminals,®® started the via 
Appia, or Appian Way, between Rome and Capua; later it reached out to 
Beneventum, Venusia, Brundisium, and Tarentum; its 333 English miles bound 
the two coasts, eased trade with Greece and the East, and collaborated with 
the other roads to make Italy one nation. In 241 the censor Aurelius Cotta 
began the Aurelian Way from Rome through Pisa and Genoa to Antibes. Caius 
Flaminius in 220 opened the Flaminian Way to Ariminum; and about the same 
time the Valerian Way cormected Tibur with Corfinium. Slowly the majestic 
network grew; the Aemilian Way climbed north from Ariminum through 
Bononia and Alutina to Placentia (187); the Postumian Way linked Genoa with 
V erona (148); and the via Popilia led from Ariminum through Ravenna to Padua 
(132). In the following century roads would dart out from Italy to York, 
Vienna, Thessalonica, and Damascus, and would line the north African coast. 
They defended, unified, and vitalized the Empire by quickening the movement 
of troops, intelligence, customs, and ideas; they became great channels of com- 
merce, and played no minor role in the peopling and enrichment of Italy and 
Europe. 

Despite these highways, trade never flourished in Italy as in the eastern Medi- 
terranean. The upper classes looked with contempt upon buying cheap and 
selling dear, and left trade to Greek and Oriental freedmen; while the country- 
side contented itself with occasional fairs, and “ninth-day” markets in the towns. 
Foreign commerce was similarly moderate. Sea transport was risky; ships were 
small, made only six miles an hour sailing or rowing, hugged the coast, and 
for the most part kept timidly in port from November to March. Carthage 
controlled the western Mediterranean, the Flellenistic monarchies controlled 
the east, and pirates periodically swept out of their lairs upon merchants rela- 
tively more honest than themselves. The Tiber was perpetuallv silting its mouth 
and blocking Rome’s port at Ostia; two hundred vessels foundered there in one 
gale; besides, the current was so strong that the voyage upstream to Rome 
hardly repaid the labor and the cost. About 200 b . c . vessels began to put in at 
Puteoli, 1 50 miles south of Rome, and ship their goods overland to the capital. 

To facilitate this external and internal trade it became necessary to establish 
a state-guaranteed system of coinage, measures, and weights.* Till the fourth 
century b . c . cattle were still accepted as a medium of exchange, since they were 
universally valuable and easily moved. As trade grew, rude chunks of copper 
(aes) were used as money (ca. 330 b . c .); estimate w'as originally aes timare, to 
value copper. The unit of value was the as (one)— i.e., one pound of copper 
by weight; ex-pend meant weighed out. When, about 338 b . c ., a copper coinage 
was issued by the state, it often bore the image of an ox, a sheep, or a hog, and 
was accordingly called pecimia (pecus, cattle). In the First Punic War, says 
Pliny, “the Republic, not having means to meet its needs, reduced the as to 


• Some Roman measures: a modius was approximately a peck; a foot was n 5/8 English 
inches; 5 Roman feet made a pace (pasms)-, 1000 paces made a mile (milia passuum) of 1619 
EngUsh yards; a iugenim was about 2/j of an acre. Twelve ounces (iinciae) made a pound. 



STOIC ROME 


79 


CHAP. IV) 

two ounces of copper; by this contrivance a saving of five sixths was effected, 
and the public debt was liquidated.” By 202 the as had fallen to an ounce; 
and in 87 b.c. it was reduced to half an ounce to help finance the Social War. 
In 269 two silver coins were minted; the denarius, equal to ten asses, and cor- 
responding to the Athenian drachma in the latter’s depreciated Hellenistic'form; 
and the sestertius, representing two and a half asses, or a quarter of a denarius. 
In 2 1 7 appeared the first Roman gold coins— the aurei— with values of twenty, 
forty, and sixty sesterces. In metallic equivalence the as would equal two, the 
sesterce five, the denarius twenty, cents in the currency of the United States; 
but as precious metals were much less plentiful than now, and therefore had 
a purchasing power several times greater than today we shall, ignoring price 
fluctuations before Nero, roughly equate the as, sesterce, denarius, and talent 
(6000 denarii) of the Roman Republic with six, fifteen, and sixty' cents, and 
$3600 respectively, in terms of United States currency in 1942.* 

The issuance of this guaranteed currency promoted the profession and 
operations of finance. The older Romans used temples as their banks, as 
we use banks as our temples; and the state continued to the end to use its 
strongly built shrines as repositories for public funds, perhaps on the theory 
that religious scruples would help discourage robbery. Moneylending was 
an old business, for the Twelve Tables had forbidden interest above eight 
and one third per cent per annum.®® The legal rate was lowered to five 
per cent in 347, and to zero in 342, but this Aristotelian prohibition was 
so easily evaded that the actual minimum rate averaged twelve per cent. 
Usury (above twelve per cent) was widespread, and debtors had periodi- 
cally to be rescued from their accumulating obligations by bankruptcy or 
legislation. In 352 b.c. the government used a very modem method of 
relief: it took over such mortgages as offered a fair chance of repayment, 
and persuaded mortgagees to accept a lower interest rate on the others.®^ 
One of the streets adjoining the Fomm became a banker’s row, crowded 
with the shops of the moneylenders (argentarii) and money-changers 
(trapezitae) . Money could be borrowed on land, crops, securities, or gov- 
ernment contracts, and for financing commercial enterprises or voyages. 
Co-operative lending took the place of industrial insurance; instead of one 
banker completely underwriting a venture, several joined in providing the 
funds. Joint-stock companies existed chiefly for the performance of govern- 
ment contracts let out on bids by the censor; they raised their capital by 
selling their stocks or bonds to the public in the form of partes or particiilae 

* In northern Italy, about 250 b.c., a bushel of wheat cost half a denarius (thirty cents); 
bed and board at an inn cost half an as (three cents) a day; 58 Jn Delos, in the second century 
B.C., a house of medium type rented for four denarii ($2jjo) a month; in Rome, aj). 50, a cup 
and saucer cost half an as (three cents) .59 



8o 


CAESAR AND CHRIST 


(chap, rv 

—“little parts,” shares. These companies of “publicans”— i.e., men engaged 
on public or state undertakings— played an active role in supplying and 
transporting materials for the army and navy in the Second Punic War— 
not without the usual attempts to cheat the government.®^ Businessmen 
(equites) directed the larger of these enterprises, freedmen the smaller. Non- 
governmental business was carried on by negotiatores, who usually provided 
their own funds. 

Industry was in the hands of independent craftsmen, working in their 
separate shops. Adost such men were freemen, but an increasing proportion 
were freedmen or slaves. Labor was highly differentiated, and produced for 
the market rather than for the individual customer. Competition by slaves 
depressed the wages of free workers, and reduced the proletariat to a bitter 
life in slums. Strikes among these men were impracticable and rare,®® but 
slave uprisings were frequent; the “First Servile War” (139 b.c.) was not 
the first. When public discontent became acute, some cause could be found 
for a war that would provide universal employment, spread depreciated 
money, and turn the wrath of the people against a foreign foe whose lands 
would feed the Roman people victorious, or receive them defeated and 
dead.®* The free workers had unions or guilds (collegia), but these seldom 
concerned themselves with wages, hours, or conditions of labor. Tradition 
credited Numa with having established or legalized them; in any case, the 
seventh century b.c. had organizations of flute players, goldsmiths, copper- 
smiths, fullers, shoemakers, potters, dyers, and carpenters.®® The “Dionysian 
Artists”— actors and musicians— were among the most widespread associa- 
tions in the ancient world. By the second century b.c. we find guilds of 
cooks, tanners, builders, bronzeworkers, ironworkers, ropemakers, weav- 
ers; but these were probably as old as the others. The chief aim of such 
unions was the simple pleasure of social intercourse; many of them were 
also mutual-benefit societies to defray the cost of funerals. 

The state regulated not only the guilds, but mar" aspects of Rome’s eco- 
nomic life. It supervised the operation of mines and other governmental 
concessions or contracts. It quieted agitation among the plebs by importing 
food and distributing it at nominal prices to the poor or to all applicants. 
It levied fines upon monopolists, and it nationalized the salt industry to end 
a monopoly that had raised the price of salt beyond the reach of the work- 
ing class. Its commercial policy was liberal: after overcoming Carthage it 
opened the western Mediterranean to all trade; and it protected Utica and, 
later, Delos on condition that they remain free ports, permitting the entry 
and exit of goods without fee. At various times, however, it forbade the 
export of arms, iron, wine, oil, or cereals; it laid a customs duty, usually of 



STOIC ROME 


8l 


CHAP. IV) 


two and a half per cent, upon the entry of most products into Rome, and 
afterward extended this modest tariff to other cities. Until 147 b.c. it required 
a tributum, or property tax, throughout Italy. All in all, its revenues were 
modest; and like other civilized states it used them chiefly for war.®® 


VII. THE CITY 

Through taxes, spoils, indemnities, and inflowing population Rome was 
now (202 B.c.) one of the major cities of the Mediterranean ensemble. The 
census of 234 listed 270,713 citizens— i.e., free adult males; the figure fell 
sharply during the great war, but rose to 258,318 in 189, and 322,000 in 
147. We may calculate a population of approximately 1,100,000 souls in 
the city-state in 189 b.c., of whom perhaps 275,000 lived within the walls 
of Rome. Italy south of the Rubicon had some 5,000,000 inhabitants.®^ Immi- 
gration, the absprption of conquered peoples, the influx, emancipation, and 
enfranchisement of slaves, were already beginning the ethnic changes that 
by Nero’s time would make Rome the New York of antiquity, half native 
and half everything. 

Two main cross streets divided the city into quarters, each with its adminis- 
trative officials and tutelary deities. Chapels were raised at important intersec- 
tions, and statues at lesser ones, to the lares contpitales, or gods of the crossings 
—a pretty custom still found in Italy. Most streets were plain earth; some were 
paved with small smooth stones from river beds, as in many Mediterranean 
cities today; about 174 the censor began to surface the major thoroughfares 
with lava blocks. In 312 Appius Claudius the Blind built the first aqueduct, 
bringing fresh water to a city that had till then depended upon springs and 
wells and the muddy Tiber. Piping water from aqueduct-fed reservoirs, the 
aristocracy began to bathe more than once a week; and soon after Hannibal’s 
defeat Rome opened its first municipal baths. At an unknown date Roman or 
Etruscan engineers built the Cloaca Maxima, whose massive stone arches were 
so wide that a wagon loaded with hay could pass under them.®® Smaller sewers 
were added to drain the marshes that surrounded and invaded Rome. The city’s 
refuse and rain water passed through openings in the streets into these drains 
and thence into the Tiber, whose pollution was a lasting problem of Roman life. 

The embellishment of the city was almost confined to its temples. Houses 
adhered to the plain Etruscan style already described, except that the exterior 
was more often of brick or stucco, and (as a sign of growing literacy) was 
often defaced with gra^ti— “scratchings” of strictly fugitive verse or prose. 
Temples were mostly of wood, wfith terra-cotta revetments and decorations, 
and followed Etruscan plans. A temple to Jupiter, Juno, and Minerva stood 
on the Capitoline hill; another to Diana on the Aventine; and others rose (be- 



82 CAESAR AND CHRIST (cHAP. IV 

fore 201 B.c.) to Juno, Mars, Janus, Venus, Victory, Fortune, Hope, etc. In 
303 Gains Fabius added to his leguminous clan name the cognomen of Pictor, 
painter, by executing frescoes in the Temple of Health on the Capitohne. Greek 
sculptors in Rome made statues of Roman gods and heroes in terra cotta, marble, 
or bronze. In 293 they erected on the Capitol a bronze Jupiter of such Olym- 
pian proportions that it could be seen from the Alban hills twenty miles away. 
About 296 the aediles set up a bronze she-wolf, to which later artists added the 
figures of Romulus and Remus. We do not know if this is the group described 
by Cicero, or if either of these is identical with the existing Wolf of the Capital; 
in any case, we have in this a masterpiece of the highest order, dead metal alive 
in every muscle and nerve. 

While through painting and statuary the aristocracy commemorated its 
victories and recommended its lineage, the people consoled themselves with 
music and the dance, comedies and games. The roads and homes of Italy 
resounded with individual or choral song; men sang at banquets, boys and 
girls chorused hymns in religious processions, bride and groom were escorted 
with hymeneal chants, and every corpse was buried with song. The flute 
was the most popular instrument, but the lyre too had its devotees, and 
became the favorite accompaniment of lyric verse. When great holidays 
came, the Romans crowded to amphitheater or stadium, and pullulated 
under the sun while hirelings, captives, criminals, or slaves ran and jumped, 
or, better, fought and died. Two great amphitheaters— the Circus Maximus 
(attributed to the first Tarquin) and the Circus Flaminius (221 b.c.) — 
admitted without charge ail free men and women who came in time to find 
seats. The expense was met at first by the state, then by the aediles out of 
their own purse, often, in the later Republic, by candidates for the con- 
sulate; the cost increased generation by generation, until in effect it barred 
the poor from seeking office. 

Perhaps we should class with these spectacles the official “triumph” of a 
returning general. Only those were eligible for it who had won a campaign 
in which 5000 of the enemy had been slain; the unfortunate commander 
who had won with less slaughter received merely an oration— for him no 
ox was sacrificed, but only a sheep (ovis). The procession formed outside 
the city, at whose borders the general and his troops were required to lay 
down their arms; thence it entered through a triumphal arch that set a 
fashion for a thousand monuments. Trumpeters led the march; after them 
came towers or floats representing the captured cities, and pictures showing 
the exploits of the victors; then wagons rumbled by, heavy with gold, silver, 
works of art, and other spoils. Marcellus’ triumph was memorable for the 
stolen statuary of Syracuse (212); Scipio Africanus in 207 displayed 14,000 
and, in 202, 123,000 pounds of silver taken from Spain and Carthage. Seventy 



STOIC ROME 


CHAP, iv) 


83 


white oxen followed, walking philosophically to their death; then the cap- 
tured chiefs of the enemy; then lictors, harpers, pipers, and incense-bearers; 
then, in a flamboyant chariot, the general himself, wearing a purple toga 
and a crowm of gold, and bearing an ivory scepter and a laurel branch as 
emblems of victory and the insignia of Jove. In the chariot with him might 
be his children; beside it rode his relatives; behind them his secretaries and 
aides. Last came the soldiers, some carrying the prizes awarded them, every- 
one wearing a crown; some praising their leaders, others deriding them; 
for it was an inviolable tradition that on these brief occasions the speech 
of the army should be free and unpunished, to remind the proud victors of 
their fallible mortality. The general mounted the Capitol to the Temple of 
Jupiter, Juno, and Minen^a, laid his loot at the feet of the gods, presented 
an animal in sacrifice, and usually ordered the captive chieftains to be slain 
as an additional thank-offering. It was a ceremony well designed to stir mili- 
tary ambition and reward military effort; for man’s vanity yields only to 
hunger and love. 


VIII. POST MORTEM 

War was the most dramatic feature of a Roman’s life, but it did not play 
so absorbing a role as in the pages of Rome’s historians. Perhaps even more 
than with us his existence centered about his family and his home. News 
reached him when it was old, so that his passions could not be stirred every 
day by the gathered turmoil of the world. The great events of his career 
were not politics and war, but anxious births, festal marriages, and somber' 
deaths. 

Old age was not then the abandoned desolation that so often darkens it 
in an individualistic age. The young never questioned their duty to care 
for the old; the old remained to the end the first consideration and the last 
authority; and after their death their graves were honored as long as a male 
descendant survived. Funerals were as elaborate as weddings. The proces- 
sion was led by a hired band of wailing women, whose organized hysteria 
was cramped by a law of the Twelve Tables^^ forbidding them to tear out 
their hair. Then came the flute players, limited by a like Solonic law to ten; 
then some dancers, one of whom impersonated the dead. Then followed in 
strange parade actors wearing the death masks, or waxen images, of those 
ancestors of the corpse who had held some magistracy. The deceased came 
next, in splendor rivaling a triumph, clothed in the full regalia of the highest 
office he had held, comfortable in a bier overspread with purple and gold- 
embroidered coverlets, and surrounded by the weapons and armor of the 
enemies he had slain. Behind him came the dead man’s sons, dressed and 



CAESAR AND CHRIST 


84 


(chap. IV 


veiled in black, his daughters unveiled, his relatives, clansmen, friends, 
clients, and freedmen. In the Forum the procession stopped, and a son or 
kinsman pronounced a eulogy. Life was worth living, if only for such a 
funeral. 

In the early centuries Rome’s dead had been cremated; now, usually, they 
were buried, though some obstinate conservatives preferred combustion. In 
either case, the remains were placed in a tomb that became an altar of wor- 
ship upon which pious descendants periodically placed some flowers and 
a httle food. Here, as in Greece and the Far East, the stability of morals and 
society was secured by the worship of ancestors and by the belief that some- 
where their spirits sunflved and watched. If they were very great and good, 
the dead, in Hellenized Roman mythology, passed to the Elysian Fields, 
or the Islands of the Blessed; nearly all, however, descended into the earth, 
to the shadowy realm of Orcus and Pluto. Pluto, the Roman form of the 
Greek god Hades, was armed with a mallet to stun the dead; Orcus (our 
ogre) was the monster who then devoured the corpse. Because Pluto was 
the most exalted of the underground deities, and because the earth was the 
ultimate source of wealth and often the repository of accumulated food 
and goods, he was worshiped also as the god of riches and plutocrats; and 
his wife Proserpina— the strayed daughter of Ceres— became the goddess 
of the germinating com. Sometimes the Roman Hell was conceived as a 
place of punishment;^" in most cases it was pictured as the abode of half- 
formless shades that had been men, not distinguished from one another by 
reward or punishment, but all equally suffering eternal darkness and final 
anonymity. There at last, said Lucian, one would find democracy.''® 



CHAPTER V 


The Greek Conquest 

201-146 B.C. 


I. THE CONQUEST OF GREECE 

W HEN Philip V of Macedon made an alliance with Hannibal against 
Rome (214) he hoped that all Greece would unite behind him 
to slay the growing young giant of the west. But rumors were about that 
he was planning, if Carthage won, to conquer all Greece with Carthage’s 
aid. As a result, the Aetolian League signed a pact to help Rome against 
Philip, and the clever Senate, before dispatching Scipio to Africa, used 
Philip’s discouragement by persuading him to a separate peace (205). The 
victory of Zama had hardly been won when the Senate, which never for- 
gave an injury, began to plot revenge upon Macedon. Rome, the Senate 
felt, could never be secure with so strong a power at her back across a narrow 
sea. When the Senate moved for war, the Assembly demurred, and a tribune 
accused the patricians of seeking to divert attention from domestic ills.^ 
The opponents of war were easily silenced by charges of cowardice and 
lack of patriotism; and in 200 b . c . T. Quinctius Flamininus sailed against 
Macedon. 

He was a youth of thirty, one of that liberal Hellenizinsr circle which 
was gathering about the Scipios in Rome. After some careful maneuvering 
he met Philip at Cynoscephalae and overwhelmed him ( 197) . Then he sur- 
prised all the Mediterranean nations, and perhaps Rome, by restoring the 
chastened Philip to a bankrupt and weakened throne, and offering freedom 
to all Greece. The imperialists in the Senate protested; but for a moment 
the liberals predominated, and in 196 the herald of Flamininus announced 
to a vast assemblage at the Isthmian games that Greece was to be free from 
Rome, from Macedon, from tribute, even from garrisons. So great a cheer 
rose from the multitude, says Plutarch, that crows flying over the stadium 
fell dead.^ When a cynical world questioned the sincerity of the Roman 
general he answered by withdrawing his army to Italy. It was a bright page 
in the history of war. 

But one war always invites another. The Aetolian League resented Rome’s 
emancipation of Greek cities formerly subject to the League, and appealed 

85 



86 CAESAR AND CHRIST (cHAP. V 

to Antiochus III, the Seleucid king, to reliberate liberated Greece. Inflated 
with some easy victories in the East, Antiochus thought of extending his 
power over all western Asia. Pergamum, fearing him, called to Rome for 
help. The Senate sent Scipio Africanus and his brother Lucius with the first 
Roman army to touch Asiatic soil; the hostile forces met at Magnesia ( 1 89), 
and Rome’s victory inaugurated her conquest of the Hellenistic East. The 
Romans marched north, drove back into Galatia (Anatolia) the Gauls who 
had threatened Pergamum, and earned the gratitude of all Ionian Greeks. 

The Greeks of Europe were not so pleased. Roman armies had spared 
Greek soil, but they now encompassed Greece on east and west. Rome had 
freed the Greeks, but on condition that both war and class war should end. 
Freedom without war was a novel and irksome life for the city-states that 
made up Hellas; theupper classes yearned to play power politics against neigh- 
boring cities, and the poor complained that Rome everywhere buttressed 
the rich against the poor. In 171 Perseus, son and successor of Philip V as 
King of Macedon, having arranged an alliance with Seleucus IV and Rhodes, 
called upon Greece to rise with him against Rome. Three years later Lucius 
Aemilius Paulus, son of the consul who had fallen at Cannae, defeated 
Perseus at Pydna, razed seventy Macedonian towns, and led Perseus captive 
to grace a magnificent triumph at Rome.* Rhodes was punished by the 
emancipation of her tributary cities in Asia, and by the establishment of a 
competitive port at Delos. A thousand Greek leaders, including the historian 
Polybius, were taken as hostages to Italy, where, in sixteen years of exile, 
700 of them died. 

During the next decade the relations between Greece and Rome moved 
even nearer to open enmity. The rival cities, factions, and classes of Hellas 
appealed to the Senate for support, and gave cause for interferences that 
made Greece actually subject though nominally free. The partisans of the 
Scipios in the Senate were overruled by realists who felt that there would 
be no lasting peace or order in Greece until it was completely under Roman 
rule. In 146 the cities of the Achaean League, while Rome was in conflict 
with Carthage and Spain, announced a war of liberation. Leaders of the 
poor seized control of the movement, freed and armed the slaves, declared 
a moratorium on debts, promised a redistribution of land, and added revolu- 

* It was on leaving for this campaign that Paulus paid his classic compliments to amateur 
strategists: “In all public places, and in private parties, there are men who know where the 
armies should be put in Macedonia, what strategical positions ought to be occupied 
They not only lay down what should be done, but when anything is decided contrary to their 
judgment they arraign the consul as though he were being impeached. . . . This 'seriously 
interferes with the successful prosecution of a war. ... [If anyone] feels confident th-c he 
can give me good advice, let him go with me to Macedonia. ... If he thinks this is too much 
trouble, let him not try to act as a pilot wliile he is on hnd.” 3 



THE GREEK CONQUEST 


CHAP, v) 


87 


tion to war. When the Romans under Mummius entered Greece they found 
a divided people and easily overcame the undisciplined Greek troops. 
Mummius burned Corinth, slew its males, sold its women and children into 
bondage, and carried nearly all its movable wealth and art to Rome. Greece 
and Macedon were made into a Roman province under a Roman governor; 
only Athens and Sparta were allowed to remain under their own laws. 
Greece disappeared from political history for two thousand years. 


II. THE TRANSFORMATION OF ROME 

Step by step the Roman Empire grew, not so much through conscious 
design as through the compulsions of circumstance and the ever receding 
frontiers of security. In bloody battles at Cremona (200) and Mutina ( 193) 
the legions again subdued Cisalpine Gaul and pushed the boundaries of Italy 
to the Alps. Spain, rewon from Carthage, had to be kept under control lest 
Carthage should win it again; besides, it was rich in iron, silver, and gold. 
The Senate exacted from it a heavy annual tribute in the form of bullion 
and coin, and the Roman governors reimbursed themselves liberally for 
spending a year away from home; so Quintus Minucius, after a brief pro- 
consulate in Spain, brought to Rome 34,800 pounds of silver and 35,000 
silver denarii. Spaniards were conscripted into the Roman army; Scipio 
Aemilianus had 40,000 of them in the force with which he took Spanish 
Numantia. In 195 b.c. the tribes broke out in wild revolt, which Marcus 
Cato put down with a hard integrity that recalled the proud virtues of a 
vanishing Roman breed. Tiberius Sempronius Gracchus (179) adjusted his 
rule sympathetically to the character and civilization of the native popu- 
lation, made friends of the tribal chieftains, and distributed land among the 
poor. But one of his successors, Lucius Lucullus ( 1 5 1 ) , violated the treaties 
made by Gracchus, attacked without cause any tribe that could yield 
plunder, and slaughtered or enslaved thousands of Spaniards without bother- 
ing to invent a pretext. Sulpicius Galba (150) lured 7000 natives to his 
camp by a treaty promising them land; when they arrived he had them sur- 
rounded and enslaved or massacred. In 154 the tribes of Lusitania (Portugal) 
began a sixteen-year war against Rome. An able leader, \^iriathus, appeared 
among them, heroic in stature, endurance, courage, and nobility; for eight 
years he defeated every army sent against him, until at last the Romans 
purchased his assassination. The rebellious Celtiberians of central Spain 
bore a siege of fifteen months in Numantia, living on their dead; at last (133) 
Scipio Aemilianus starved them into surrender. In general the policy of the 



88 CAESAR AND CHRIST (CHAP. V 

Roman Republic in Spain was so brutal and dishonest that it cost more than 
it paid. “Never,” said Mommsen, “had war been waged with so much 
perfidy, cruelty, and avarice.”^ 

The plunder from the provinces provided the funds for that orgy of 
corrupt and selfish wealth which was to consume the Republic in revolu- 
tion. The indemnities paid by Carthage, Macedon, and Syria, the slaves that 
poured into Rome from every field of glory, the precious metals captured 
in the conquest of Cisalpine Gaul and Spain, the 400,000,000 sesterces 
($60,000,000) taken from Antiochus and Perseus, the 4503 pounds of gold 
and 220,000 pounds of silver seized by Manlius Vulso in his Asiatic cam- 
paigns®— these and other windfalls turned the propertied classes in Rome 
in half a century (202-146 b.c.) from men of means into persons of such 
opulence as hitherto only monarchs had known. Soldiers returned from 
these gigantic raids with their pouches full of coins and spoils. As currency 
multiplied in Italy faster than building, the owners of realty in the capital 
tripled their fortunes without stirring a muscle or a nerve. Industry lagged 
while commerce flourished; Rome did not have to produce goods; it took 
the world’s money and paid with that for the world’s goods. Public works 
were expanded beyond precedent and enriched the “publicans” who lived 
on state contracts; any Roman who had a little money bought shares in 
their corporations.® Bankers proliferated and prospered; they paid interest 
on deposits, cashed checks (praescriptiones), met bills for their clients, lent 
and borrowed money, made or mamged investments, and fattened on such 
relentless usury that cutthroat {sector) and moneylender became one word.'^ 
Rome was becoming not the industrial or commercial, but the financial and 
political, center of the white man’s world. 

Equipped with such means, the Roman patriciate and upper middle class 
passed with impressive speed from stoic simplicity to reckless luxury; the 
lifetime of Cato (234-149) saw the transformation almost completed. 
Houses became larger as families became smaller; furniture grew lavish in 
a race for conspicuous expense; great sums were paid for Babylonian rugs, 
for couches inlaid with ivory, silver, or gold; precious stones and metals 
shone on tables and chairs, on the bodies of women, on the harness of horses. 
As physical exertion diminished and wealth expanded, the old simple diet 
gave way to long and heavy meals of meat, game, delicacies, and condi- 
ments. Exotic foods were indispensable to social position or pretense; one 
magnate paid a thousand sesterces for the oysters served at a meal; another 
imported anchovies at 1600 sesterces a cask; another paid 1200 for a jar of 
caviar. Good chefs fetched enormous prices on the slave auction block. 
Drinking increased; goblets had to be large and preferably of gold; wine 



THE GREEK CONQUEST 


CHAP, v) 


89 


was less diluted, sometimes not at all. Sumptuary laws were passed by the 
Senate limiting expenditure on banquets and clothing, but as the senators 
ignored these regulations, no one bothered to observe them. “The citizens,” 
Cato mourned, “no longer listen to good advice, for the belly has no ears.”® 
The individual became rebelliously conscious of himself as against the state, 
the son as against the father, the woman as against the man. 

Usually the power of woman rises with the we-lth of a society, for when 
the stomach is satisfied hunger leaves the field to love. Prostitution flourished. 
Homosexualism was stimulated by contact with Greece and Asia; many 
rich men paid a talent ($3600) for a male favorite; Cato complained that a 
pretty boy cost more than a farm.^® But women did not yield the field to 
these Greek and Syrian invaders. They took eagerly to all those supports of 
beauty that wealth now put within their reach. Cosmetics became a neces- 
sity, and caustic soap imported from Gaul tinged graying hair into auburn 
locks.^^ The rich bourgeois took pride in adorning his wife and daughter 
with costly clothing or jewelry and made them the town criers of his pros- 
perity. Even in government the role of women grew. Cato cried out that 
“all other men rule over women; but we Romans, who rule all men, are 
ruled by our women.” In 105 b.c. the free women of Rome swept into 
the Forum and demanded the repeal of the Oppian Law of 215, which had 
forbidden women to use gold ornaments, varicolored dresses, or chariots. 
Cato predicted the ruin of Rome if the law should be repealed. Livy puts 
into his mouth a speech that every generation has heard: 

If we had, each of us, upheld the rights and authority of the hus- 
band in our own households, we should not today have this trouble 
with our women. As things are now, our liberty of action, which has 
been annulled by female despotism at home, is crushed and trampled 
on here in the Forum. . . . Call to mind all the regulations respecting 
women by which our ancestors curbed their license and made them 
obedient to their husbands; and yet with all those restrictions you 
can scarcely hold them in. If now you permit them to remove these 
restraints . . . and to put themselves on an equality with their hus- 
bands, do you imagine that you will be able to bear them? From the 
moment that they become your equals they will be your masters.^® 

The women laughed him down, and stood their ground until the law was 
repealed. Cato revenged himself as censor by multiplying by ten the taxes 
on the articles that Oppius had forbidden. But the tide was in flow, and 
could not be turned. Other laws disadvantageous to women were repealed 
or modified or ignored. Women won the free administration of their 
dowries, divorced their husbands or occasionally poisoned them, and 



90 CAESAR AND CHRIST (CHAP. V 

doubted the wisdom of bearing children in an age of urban congestion and 
imperialistic wars. 

Already by 1 6o Cato and Polybius had noted a decline of population and 
the inability of the state to raise such armies as had risen to meet Hannibal. 
The new generation, having inherited world mastery, had no time or inclina- 
tion to defend it; that readiness for war which had characterized the Roman 
landowner disappeared now that ownership was being concentrated in a 
few families and a proletariat without stake in the country filled the slums 
of Rome. Men became brave by proxy; they crowded the amphitheater to 
see bloody games, and hired gladiators to fight before them at their ban- 
quets. Finishing schools were opened for both sexes, where young men and 
women learned to sing, play the lyre, and move gracefully.^^ In the upper 
classes manners becam.e more refined as morals were relaxed. In the lower 
classes manners continued to be coarse and vigorous, amusements often 
violent, language freely obscene; we get the odor of this lusty profaimm 
vidgus in Plautus, and understand why it wearied of Terence. When a band 
of flute players attempted a musical concert at a triumph in 1 67, the audience 
forced the musicians to change their performance into a boxing match.^® 

In the widening middle classes commercialism ruled unhindered. Their 
wealth was based no longer on realty but on mercantile investment or man- 
agement. The old morality and a few Catos could not keep this new regime 
of mobile capital from setting the tone of Roman life. Everyone longed for 
money, everyone judged or was judged in terms of money. Contractors 
cheated on such a scale that many government properties— e.g., the Mace- 
donian mines— had to be abandoned because the lessees exploited the work- 
ers and mulcted the state to a point where the enterprise brought in more 
tribulation than profit.^® That aristocracy which (if we may believe the 
historians— and we must not) had once esteemed honor above life adopted 
the new morahty and shared in the new wealth; it thought no longer of the 
nation, but of class and individual privileges and perquisites; it accepted 
presents and liberal bribes for bestowing its favor upon men or states, and 
found ready reasons for war with countries that had more wealth than 
power. Patricians stopped plebeians in the street and asked or paid for their 
votes. It became a common thing for magistrates to embezzle public funds 
and an uncommon thing to see them prosecuted; for who could punish rob- 
bery among his fellows when half the members of the Senate had joined in 
violating treaties, robbing allies, and despoiling provinces? “He who steals 
from a citizen,” said Cato, “ends his days in fetters and chains; but he who 
steals from the community ends them in purple and gold.”^’^ 

Nevertheless, the prestige of the Senate was higher than ever before. It 



THE GREEK CONQUEST 


91 


CHAP, v) 

had brought Rome successfully through two Punic Wars and three Mace- 
donian Wars; it had challenged and overcome all of Rome’s rivals, had won 
the subsendent friendship of Egypt, and had captured so much of the world’s 
wealth that in 146 Italy was freed from direct taxation. In the crises of war 
and policy it had usurped many powers of the assemblies and the magis- 
trates, but victory sanctified its usurpations. The machinery of the comtia 
had been made ridiculous by empire; the turbulent peoples who now sub- 
mitted to rule by a Senate largely composed of seasoned statesmen and tri- 
umphant generals would have protested passionately against having their 
affairs determined by the few thousand Italians who could attend the assem- 
blies in Rome. The principle of democracy is freedom, the principle of war 
is discipline; each requires the absence of the other. War demands superior 
intelligence and courage, quick decisions, united action, immediate obedi- 
ence; the frequency of war doomed democracy. By law the Centurial As- 
sembly alone had the right to declare war or make peace; but by its power 
to conduct foreign relations the Senate could usually bring matters to a 
point where the Assembly had no longer any practical choice.^® The Senate 
controlled the Treasury and all outlays of public funds; and it controlled 
the judiciary by the rule that all important juries had to be taken from the 
Senatorial list. The formulation and interpretation of the laws were in the 
hands of the patrician class. 

Within this aristocracy there was an oligarchy of dominant families. Till 
Sulla, Roman history is a record of families rather than of individuals; no 
great statesman stands out, but generation after generation the same names 
occur in the higher offices of the state. Out of 200 consuls between 233 and 
133 B.C., 159 belonged to uventy-six families, one hundred to ten. The most 
powerful family in this period was the Cornelii. From the Publius Cornelius 
Scipio who lost the battle of the Trebia (218), through his son Scipio 
Africanus who defeated Hannibal, to the latter’s adoptive grandson, Scipio 
Aemilianus, who destroyed Carthage in 146, the history of Reman politics 
and war is largely the story of this family; and the revolution that destroyed 
the aristocracy was begun by the Gracchi, grandsons of Aemilianus. The 
saving victory at Zama made Africanus so popular with all classes that for 
a time Rome was ready to give him any office he desired. But when he and 
his brother Lucius returned from the war in Asia (187), the party of Cato 
demanded that Lucius should give an account of the money paid him by 
Antiochus as an indemnity to be transmitted to Rome. Africanus refused 
to let his brother answer; instead he tore the records to shreds before the 
Senate. Lucius was brought to trial before the Assembly and was con- 
victed of embezzlement; he was saved from punishment by the tribunician 



92 CAESAR AND CHRIST (CHAP. V 

veto of Africanus’ son-in-law, Tiberius Sempronius Gracchus. Summoned 
to trial in his turn, Africanus disrupted the proceedings by inviting and lead- 
ing the Assembly to the Temple of Jupiter to celebrate the anniversary of 
Zama. Summoned again, he refused to obey the call, retired to his estate 
at Liternum, and remained there unmolested till his death. The emergence 
of such individualism in politics corresponded with the growth of individu- 
alism in commerce and morals. The Roman Republic would soon be de- 
stroyed by the unfettered energy of its great men. 

The redeeming feature of this aristocracy and this age was their awakened 
appreciation of the beautiful. Contact with Greek culture in Italy, Sicily, and 
Asia had acquainted the Romans not merely with the appurtenances of luxury 
but with the highest products of classic art. The conquerors brought back with 
them world-famous paintings and statues, cups and mirrors of chased metal, 
costly textiles and furniture. The older generation was shocked by Marcellus’ 
adornment of Roman squares with the stolen sculptures of Syracuse; they com- 
plained not of the robbery, but of the “idleness and vain talk” among once in- 
dustrious citizens who now stopped to “examine and criticize trifles.” Fulvius 
carried off 1015 statues from Pyrrhus’ collection in Ambracia; Aemilius Paulus 
filled fifty chariots in his triumph with the art treasures he had taken from 
Greece as partial payment for liberating her; Sulla Verres, Nero, and a thousand 
other Romans were to do likewise through two hundred years. Greece was 
denuded to clothe the Roman mind. 

Overwhelmed with this invasion, Italian art abandoned its native quality and 
styles and, with one exception, surrendered to Greek artists, themes, and forms. 
Greek sculptors, painters, and architects, following the line of greatest gold, 
migrated to Rome and slowly Hellenized the capital of their conquerors. Rich 
Romans began to build their mansions in the Greek manner around an open 
court, and to adorn them with Greek columns, statuary, paintings, and furni- 
ture. Temples changed more slowly, lest the gods take offense; for them the 
short cella and high podium of the Tuscan style remained the rule; but as more 
Olympians were domiciled in Rome it seemed appropriate to des'gn their homes 
on the slenderer Hellenic scale. In one vital respect, however, Reman art, while 
still taking hints from Greece, expressed with unique means and power the 
sturdy Italic scul. Fcr triumphal and decorative monuments, basilicas and aque- 
ducts, the Roman architect replaced the architrave with the arch. In 1 84 Cato 
built in stone the Basilica Porcia; five years later Aemilius Paulus gave its first 
form to that Basilica Aemilia which his descendants would repair and beautify 
through many generations.* The typical Roman basilica, designed for the 
transaction cf business or law, was a long rectangle divided into nave and aisles 

* The basilica (sc. stoa—\.e., royal portico) was a Hellenistic application of the arch to the 
Persian palace and the Egyptian hypostyle hall; Delos and Syracuse had raised such structures 
in the third century b.c. 



THE GREEK CONQUEST 


93 


CHAP. V) 

by two internal rows of columns, and usually roofed with a coffered barrel 
vault— a development taken from Alexandria.-® Since the nave v’as higher than 
the aiiles, a clerestory of pierced stene trellises could be carved above each 
aisle for the admission of light and air. Here, of course, was the essential in- 
terior form of the medieval cathedral. With these vast edifices Rome began 
to take on that aspect of magnificence and strength which was to distinguish 
the city even after it ceased to be the capital of the world. 


HI. THE NEW GODS 

How were the old gods faring in this age of reckless change? Apparently 
a rivulet of unbelief had trickled down from the aristocracy to the crowd; 
it is hard to understand how a people still faithful to the ancient pantheon 
could have accepted with such boisterous approval those comedies in which 
Plautus— with whatever excuse of following Greek models— made fun of 
Jupiter’s labors with Alcmena, and turned Mercury into a buffoon. Even 
Cato, so anxious to preserve old forms, marveled at the ability of two augurs 
to keep from laughing when they met face to face.-^ Too long these takers 
of auspices had been suborned to political trickery; prodigies and portents 
had been concocted to mold public opinion, the vote of the people had 
been annulled by pious humbuggery, and religion had consented to turn 
exploitation into a sacrament. It was a bad cmen that Polybius, after living 
seventeen years among the highest circles in Rome, could write, about 150 
B.C., as if the Roman religion were merely a tocl of government: 

The quality in which the Roman commonwealth is most distinctly 
superior is, in my judgment, the nature of its religion. The very thing 
that among other nations is an object of reproach— i.e., superstition— 
is that which maintains the cohesion of the Roman state. These mat- 
ters are clothed in such pomp, and introduced to such an extent into 
public and private life, as no other religion can parallel. ... I be- 
lieve that the government has adopted this course for the sake of the 
common people. This might not have been necessary had it been pos- 
sible to form a state composed cf wise men; but as every multitude 
is fickle full of lawless desires, unreasoned passion, and violent anger, 
it must be held in by invisible terrors and religious pagear.try.-- 

Polybius could have justified himself, perhaps, by recent incidents tend- 
ing to show that, despite Plautus and philosophy, superstition still was king. 
When the disaster of Cannae seemed to leave Rome defenseless against 
Hannibal, the excitable populace fell into a panic, and cried, “To what god 
must we pray to save Rome?” The Senate sought to still the commotion by 



94 


CAESAR AND CHRIST 


(chap. V 

human sacrifice; then-by prayers to Greek gods; then by applying the Greek 
ritual to all the gods, Reman and Greek alike. Finally the Senate decided 
that if it could not prevent superstition it would organize and control it. 
In 205 it announced that the Sibylline Books foretold that Hannibal would 
leave Italy if the Magna Mater— a form of the goddess Cybele— should be 
brought from Phrygian Pessinus to Rome. Attains, King of Pergamum, con- 
sented; the black stone which was believed to be the incarnation of the Great 
Mother was shipped to Ostia, where it was received with impressive cere- 
mony by Scipio Africanus and a band of virtuous matrons. When the vessel 
that bore it was grounded in the Tiber’s mud, the Vestal Virgin Claudia 
freed it, and drew it upstream to Rome, by the magic power of her chastity. 
Then the matrons, each holding the stone tenderly in her turn, carried it 
in solemn procession to the Temple of Victory, and the pious people burned 
incense at their doors as the Great Mother passed. The Senate was shocked 
to find that the new divinity had to be served by self-emasculated priests; 
such men were found, but no Roman was allowed to be among them. From 
that time onward Rome celebrated, every April, the Megalesia, or Feast of 
the Great Goddess, first with wild sorrow and then with wild rejoicing. 
For Cybele was a vegetation deity, and legend told how her son Attis, symbol 
of autumn and spring, had died and gone to Hades, and then had risen from 
the dead. 

In that same year (205) Hannibal left Italy, and the Senate complimented 
itself on its handling of the religious crisis. But the wars with Macedon 
opened the gates to Greece and the East; in the wake of soldiers returning 
with Eastern spoils, ideas, and myths came a flood of Greek and Asiatic 
captives, slaves, refugees, traders, travelers, athletes, artists, actors, musicians, 
teachers, and lecturers; and men in their migrations carry along their gods. 
The lower classes of Rome were pleased to learn of Dionysus-Bacchus, of 
Orpheus and Eurydice, of mystic rites that gave a divine inspiration and 
intoxication, of initiations that revealed the resurrected deity and promised 
the worshiper eternal life. In 186 the Senate was disturbed to learn that a 
considerable minority of the people had adopted the Dionysian cult, and 
that the new god was being celebrated by nocturnal bacchanalia whose 
secrecy lent color to rumors of unrestrained drinking and sexual revelry. 
“More uncleanliness was wrought with men than with women,” says Livy; 
and he adds, probably turning gossip into history, that “whoever would not 
submit to defilement . . . was sacrificed as a victim.”-® The Senate sup- 
pressed the cult, arrested 7000 of the devotees, and sentenced hundreds to 
death. It was a temporary victory in the long war that Rome was to wage 
against Oriental faiths. 



CHAP. V) 


THE GREEK CONQUEST 


95 


IV. THE COMING OF PHILOSOPHY 

The Greek conquest of Rome took the form of sending Greek religion 
and comedy to the Roman plebs; Greek morals, philosophy, and art to the 
upper classes. These Greek gifts conspired with wealth and empire in that 
sapping of Roman faith and character which was one part of Hellas’ long 
revenge upon her conquerors. The conquest reached its climax in Roman 
philosophy, from the stoic Epicureanism of Lucretius to the epicurean 
Stoicism of Seneca. In Christian theology Greek metaphysics overcame the 
gods of Italy. Greek culture triumphed in the rise of Constantinople as first 
the rival anjl then the successor of Rome; and when Constantinople fell, 
Greek literature, philosophy, and art reconquered Italy and Europe in the 
Renaissance. This is the central stream in the history of European civili- 
zation; all other currents are tributaries. “It was no little brook that flowed 
from Greece into our city,” said Cicero, “but a mighty river of culture and 
learning.”-^ Henceforth the mental, artistic, and religious life of Rome was 
a part of the Hellenistic world.* 

The invading Greeks found a strategic opening in the schools and lec- 
ture halls of Rome. A swelling stream of “Greeklings,” as the 

scornful Romans called them— followed the armies returning from the East. 
Many of them, as slaves, became tutors in Roman families; some, the gram- 
imtici, inaugurated secondary education in Rome by opening schools for 
instruction in the language end literature of Greece; some, the rhetores, gave 
private instruction and public lectures on oratory, literary composition, and 
philosophy. Roman orators— even the mishellenist Cato— began to model 
their addresses on the speeches of Lysias, Aeschines, and Demosthenes. 

Few of these Greek teachers had any religious belief; fewer transmitted 
any; a small minority of them followed Epicurus and preceded Lucretius 
in describing religion as the chief evil in human life. The patricians saw 
where the wind was blowing, and tried to stop it; in 173 the Senate banished 
two Epicureans, and in 161 it decreed that “no philosophers or rhetors 
shall be permitted in Rome.” The wind would not stop. In 159 Crates of 
Alallus, Stoic head of the royal library at Pergamum, came to Rome on an 
official embassy, broke a leg, stayed on, and, while convalescing, gave lec- 
tures on literature and philosophy. In 155 Athens sent as ambassadors to 
Rome the leaders of its three great philosophical schools: Carneades the 
Academic or Platonist, Critolaus the Peripatetic or Aristotelian, and Diog- 

* Said Horace, in a now-trite line: Graecia capta jennn victoreTii cepit: “Conquered Greece 
took captive her barbarous conqueror.” 



96 CAESAR AND CHRIST (CHAP. V 

enes the Stoic of Seleucia. Their coming was almost as strong a stimulus 
as Chrysoloras would bring to Italy in 1453. Carneades spoke on eloquence 
so eloquently th^t the younger set came daily to hear him.-® He was a com- 
plete skeptic, doubted the existence of the gods, and argued that as good 
reasons could be given for doing injustice as for being just— a belated sur- 
render of Plato to Thrasymachus.^® When old Cato heard of this he moved 
in the Senate that the ambassadors be sent home. They were. But the new 
generation had tasted the wine of philosophy; and from this time onward 
the rich youth of Rome went eagerly to Athens and Rhodes to exchange 
their oldest faith for the newest doubts. 

The very conquerors of Greece were in person the sponsors of Hellenistic 
culture and philosophy in Rome. Flamininus, who had loved Greek litera- 
ture before invading Alacedon and freeing Greece, was deeply moved by 
the art and drama he saw in Hellas. We must lay it to the credit side of 
Rome that some of its generals could understand Polycleitus and Pheidias, 
Scopas and Praxiteles, even if they carried their appreciation to the point 
of robbery. Of all the spoils that Aemilius Paulus brought back from his 
victories over Perseus, he kept for himself only the library of the King, as 
a heritage for his children. He had his sons instructed in Greek literature 
and philosophy as well as in the Roman arts of the chase and war; and so 
far as his public duties permitted he shared in these studies with his children. 

When Paulus died, his youngest son was adopted by his friend, P. Cor- 
nelius Scipio, son of Africanus. Following Roman custom, the lad took the 
name of his adoptive father and added the name of his father’s clan; in this 
way he became the P. Cornelius Scipio Aemilianus whom we shall hereafter 
mean by Scipio. He was a handsome and healthy youth, simple in habits 
and moderate in speech, affectionate and generous, so honest that at his death, 
after having all the plunder of Carthage pass through his hands, he left only 
thirty-three pounds of silver and two of gold— though he had lived like a 
scholar rather than as a man of means. In his youth he met the Greek exile 
Polybius, who earned his gratitude and lifelong friendship by giving him 
good advice and gccd books. The boy won his spurs by fighting under his 
father at Pydna; in Spain he accepted the challenge of the enemy to single 
combat, and won.^^ 

In private life he gathered about him a group of distinguished Romans 
interested in Greek thought. Chief among them was Gains Laelius, a man 
of kindly wisdom and steadfast friendship, just in judgment and blameless 
in life, and second only to Aemilianus in eloquence of speech and purity 
of style. Cicero, across a century, fell in love with Laelius, named after him 
his essay on friendship, and wished he might have lived not in his own turbu- 



CHAP.V) THE GREEK CONQUEST 97 

lent epoch but in that exalted circle of Rome’s intellectual youth. Its in- 
fluence on literature was considerable; through participation in it Terence 
developed the elegant precision of his language; and Gains Lucilius ( 1 8o- 
103) perhaps learned here to give a social purpose to the satires with which 
he lashed the vices and luxury of the age. 

The Greek mentors of this group were Polybius and Panaetius. Polybius 
lived for years in Scipio’s home. He was a realist and a rationalist, and had 
few illusions about men and states. Panaetius came from Rhodes and, like 
Polybius, belonged to the Greek aristocracy. For many years he lived with 
Scipio in affectionate intimacy and reciprocal influence: he stirred Scipio 
to all the nobility of Stoicism, and probably it was Scipio who persuaded 
him to modify the extreme ethical demands of that philosophy into a more 
practicable creed. In a book On Duties Panaetius laid down the central ideas 
of Stoicism: that man is part of a whole and must co-operate with it— with 
his family, his country, and the divine Soul of the World; that he is here 
not to enjoy the pleasures of the senses, but to do his duty without com- 
plaint or stint. Panaetius did not, like the earlier Stoics, reouire a perfect 
virtue, or complete indifference to the goods and fortunes of life. Educated 
Romans grasped at this philosophy as a dignified and presentable substitute 
for a faith in which they had ceased to believe, and found in its ethic a moral 
code completely congenial to their traditions and ideals. Stoicism became 
the inspiration of Scipio, the ambition of Cicero, the better self of Seneca, 
the guide of Trajan, the consolation of ikurelius, and the conscience of Rome. 


V. THE AWAKENING OF LITERATURE 

It was a basic purpose of the Scipionic circle to encourage literature as 
well as philosophy, to mold the Latin tongue into a refined and fluent literary 
medium, to lure the Roman muses to the nourishing springs of Greek poetry, 
and to provide an audience for promising writers of verse or prose. In 204 
Scipio Africanus proved his character by welcoming to Rome a poet brought 
there by Cato, the strongest opponent of everything represented by the 
Scipios and their friends. Quintus Ennius had been bom of Greek and 
Italian parentage near Brundisium (239). He had received his education 
in Tarentum, and his enthusiastic spirit had been deeply impressed by the 
Greek dramas presented on the Tarentine stage. His courage as a soldier 
in Sardinia attracted Cato, who was quaestor there. Arrived in Rome, he 
lived by teaching Latin and Greek, recited his verses to his friends, and 
found admittance to the circle of the Scipios. 

There was hardly a poetic form that he did not try. He wrote a few 



98 CAESAR AND CHRIST (CHAP. V 

comedies and at least twenty tragedies. He was in love with Euripides, 
flirted like him with radical ideas, and plagued the pious with such Epi- 
curean quips as, “I grant you there are gods, but they don’t care what men 
do; else it would go well with the good and ill with the bad— wliich rarely 
happens”;^® according to Cicero the audience applauded the lines.^® He 
translated or paraphrased Euhemerus’ Sacred History, which argued that 
the gods were merely dead heroes deified by popular sentiment. He was 
not immune to theology of a kind, for he announced that the soul of Homer, 
having passed through many bodies, including Pythagoras and a peacock, 
now resided in Ennius. He wrote with verve an epic history of Rome from 
Aeneas to Pyrrhus, and these Annales became, till Virgil, the national poem 
of Italy. A few fragments survive, of which the most famous is a line that 
Roman conservatives never tired of quoting: 

Moribiis antiquis stat res Romana virisqiie— 

“the Roman state stands through its ancient morals and its great men.” 
Metrically the poem was a revolution; it replaced the loose “Saturnian” 
verse of Naevius with the flowing and flexible hexameters of Greek epic 
poetr)^ Ennius molded Latin to new forms and powers, filled his lines with 
the meat of thought, and prepared for Lucretius, Horace, and Virgil in 
method, vocabulary, theme, and ideas. To crown his career he wrote a 
treatise on the pleasures of the palate, and died of gout at seventy, after com- 
posing a proud epitaph: 

Pay me no tears, nor for my passing grieve; 

, I linger on the lips of men, and live.®® 

Ennius succeeded in everything but comedy; perhaps he took philosophy 
too seriously, forgetting his counsel that “one must philosophize, but not 
too much.”®^ The people rightly preferred laughter to philosophy, and 
made Plautus rich and Ennius poor. For like reasons they gave little en- 
couragement to the tragic drama in Rome. The tragedies of Pacuvius and 
Accius were acclaimed by the aristocracy, ignored by the people, and for- 
gotten by time. 

In Rome, as in Athens, plays were presented to the public by state officials as 
partial celebration of a religious festival or as the obsequies of some distinguished 
citizen. The theater of Plaunis and Terence consisted of a wooden scaffolding 
supporting a decorated background (the scaena), and, in front of this, a circular 
orchestra, or platform for dancing; the rear half of this circle formed the pros- 
caenium, or stage. These flim.sy structures were tom down after each festival, 
like our reviewing stands today. The spectators stood, or sat on stools they had 
brought, or squatted on the ground under the sky. Not till 145 was a complete 



CHAP.v) THE GREEK CONQUEST 99 

theater built in Rome, still of wood and roofless, but fitted with seats in the 
Greek semicircular style. No admission was charged; slaves might attend, but not 
sit; women were admitted only in the rear. The audience in this period was prob- 
ably the roughest and dullest in dramatic history— a jostling, boisterous crowd 
of “groundlings”; it is sad to note how often the prologues beg for quiet and 
better manners, and how the crude jokes and stereotyped ideas must be repeated 
to be understood. Some prologues ask mothers to leave their babies at home, or 
threaten noisy children, or admonish women not to chatter so much; such peti- 
tions occur even in the midst of the published plays.®^ If an exhibition of prize 
fighting or rope walking happened to compete, the play, as like as not, would be 
interrupted until the more exciting performance was over. At the end of a 
Roman comedy the words. Nunc plaudite mines, or some variant, made plain 
that the play was finished and that applause was in order. 

The best feature of the Roman stage was the acting. The leading part was 
usually played by the manager, a freeman; the other performers were mostly 
Greek slaves. Any citizen who became an actor forfeited his civic rights— a cus- 
tom that lasted till Voltaire. Female parts were taken by men. As audiences were 
small, actors in this age did not wear masks, but contented themselves with paint 
and wigs. About loo b.c., as audiences grew larger, the mask became necessary to 
distinguish the characters; it was called persona, apparently from the Etruscan 
word for mask, phersu; and the parts were called dramatis personae— rmsks of 
the play. Tragedians wore a high shoe, or “buskin” {cothurnus), comedians a low 
shoe, or “sock” {soccus). Parts of the play were sung to the obbligato of a flute; 
sometimes singers sang the parts while actors performed them in pantomime. 

The Plautine comedies were written in rough and ready iambic verse, imitating 
the meter as well as the matter of their Greek models. Most of the Latin comedies 
that have come dovm to us were taken directly, or by combination, from one or 
more Greek dramas; usually from Philemon, Menander, or other practitioners 
of the New Comedy in Athens. The author and title of the Greek original were 
usually named on the title page. Adaptations of Aristophanes and the Old 
Comedy were ruled out by a law of the Twelve Tables punishing political satire 
with death.=*3 It was probably fear of this lethal legislation that led the Latin 
playwrights to keep the Greek scenes, characters, customs, names, even coins, 
of their originals; but for Plautus Roman law would have banished Roman life 
almost completely from the Roman stage. This police supervision did not exclude 
coarseness and obscenity; the aedile wished to amuse the crowd, not to elevate it; 
and the Roman government was never displeased by the ignorance of the multi- 
tude. The audience preferred broad humor to wit, buffoonery to subtlety, vul- 
garity to poetry, Plautus to Terence. 

T. Maccius Plautus— literally, Titus the flat-footed clown— had made his 
first entrance in Umbria in 254. Coming to Rome, he worked as a stage 
hand, saved his money, invested it eagerly, and lost it. To eat he wrote plays; 
his adaptations from the Greek pleased by the Roman allusions scattered 



100 CAESAR AND CHRIST (CHAP. V 

through them; he made money again and was given the citizenship of Rome. 
He was a man of the people and the earth, exuberantly jolly, Rabelaisianly 
robust; he laughed with everyone at everyone, but felt a hearty good will 
toward all. He wrote or refurbished 130 plays, of which twenty survive. 
The Miles Gloriosus is a jolly picture of a braggart soldier, whose servant 
feeds him hopefully with lies: 

Servant: You saw those girls who stopped me yesterday? 

Captain: What did they say? 

Servant: Why, when you passed, they asked me, 

“What! is the great Achilles here?” I answered, 

“No, it’s his brother.” Then says the other one, 

“Troth, he is handsome! What a noble man! 

What splendid hair!” . . . and begged me, both of them, 

... To make you take a walk again today. 

That they might get a better sight of you. 

Captain: ’Tis a great nuisance being so very handsome! 

The Amphitryon turns the laugh upon Jove, who, disguised as Alcmena’s 
husband, calls upon himself to witness his own oath and offers pious sacri- 
fice to Jupiter.^® The day after he seduces the lady she bears twins. At 
the end Plautus asks the god to forgive him and to take the lion’s share of the 
applause. The story proved as popular in the Rome of Plautus as in the 
Athens of Menander, the Paris of Moliere, or the New York of our own 
time. The Aulularia is the tale of a miser’s hoard, told with more sympathy 
than in Moliere’s Avare; the miser collects the parings of his nails, and laments 
the wasted water in the tears he has shed. The Menaeclmn is the old story 
of twins and their climactic recognition— a source for Shakespeare’s Comeiy 
of Errors. Lessing thought the Captivi the best play ever staged;®® Plautus, 
too, liked it, and made its prologue say: 

It is not hackneyed or just like the rest; 

It has no filthy lines one must not quote. 

No perjured pander, and no wicked wench. 

It is true; but the plot is so intricate, so dependent upon improbable coinci- 
dences and revelations, that a mind allergic to dead history may be forgiven 
for passing it by. What made these comedies succeed was not their ancient 
plots but their wealth of humorous incident, their rollicking puns as bad as 
Shakespeare’s, their boisterous indecency, their gallery of precipitate women, 
and their occasional sentiment; in every play the audience could rely upon 
finding a love affair, a seduction, a handsome and virtuous hero, and a slave 
with more brains than all the rest of the characters put together. Here, almost 
at its outset, Roman literature touches the common man, and reaches, through 



lOI 


CHAP.V) THE GREEK CONQUEST 

Greek disguises, to the realities of daily life as Latin poetry would never do 
again. 

Probably in the year of Plautus’ death (184), Publius Terentius Afer was 
bom at Carthage of Phoenician, perhaps also of African, blood. We know 
nothing more of him until he appears as the slave of Terentius Lucanus in 
Rome. This senator recognized the shy lad’s talent, gave him an education, 
and freed him; the youth in gratitude took his master’s name. We get a 
pleasant note of Roman manners when we hear how Terence, “poor and 
meanly clad,” came to the house of Caecilius Statius— whose comedies, now 
lost, were then dominating the Roman stage— and read him the first scene of 
the Andria. Caecilius was so charmed that he invited the poet to dinner and 
listened admiringly to the rest.®'^ Terence soon won a hearing from 
Aemilianus and Laelius, who sought to form his style in the polished Latin 
so dear to their hearts. Hence gossip said that Laehus was writing Terence’s 
plays— a report which the author, with tact and prudence, neither confirmed 
nor denied.®* Moved perhaps by the respectful Hellenism of the Scipionic 
circle., Terence adhered faithfully to his Greek originals, gave his plays 
Greek titles, avoided allusions to Roman life, and called himself merely a 
translator®®— a modest understatement of his work. 

We do not know the fate of the play that Caecilius liked so well. The 
Hecyra, which Terence wrote next, failed because its audience slipped away 
to watch a bear fight. Fortune smiled in 162 when he produced his most 
famous play— the Heauton Tbnoroiimmos, or “Self-Tormentor.” It told 
the story of a father who had forbidden his son to marry the girl of his 
choice; the sen married her nevertheless; the father disowned and banished 
him, and then, in self-punishing remorse, refused to touch his wealth, but 
hved in hard labor and poverty. A neighbor proposes to mediate; the father 
asks why he takes so kindly an interest in the troubles of others; and the 
neighbor replies in a world-renowned line which all the audience applauded: 

Homo sum; huviani nihil a me aliemvm puto— 

I am a man; I consider nothing human alien to me.” In the following year 
The Eunuch was so well received that it was performed twice in the same 
day (then a rare event), and earned Terence 8000 sesterces ($1200) between 
morning and night.^® A few months later appeared the Fhormio, named 
from the witty servant who saved his master from paternal ire, and became 
the model for Beaumarchais’ lusty Figaro. In 160 Terence’s last play, the 
Adelphi, or “Brothers.” was performed at the funeral games of Aemilius 
Paulus. Soon afterward the playwright sailed for Greece. On the way back 
he died of illness in Arcadia, in his twenty-fifth year. 

His later plays had suffered in popularity because Hellenism had won in 



102 


CAESAR AND CHRIST 


(chap. V 


him too full a victory. He lacked the vivacity and abounding humor of 
Plautus; he never thought to deal with Roman life. There were no lusty 
villains in his comedies, no reckless strumpets; all his feminine characters 
were handled with tenderness, and even his prostitutes hovered on the brink 
of virtue. There were fine pithy lines and memorable phrases; hinc illae 
lacrimae (“hence those tears”), fortes fortuna adhivat (“fortune favors the 
brave”), quot homines tot sententiae (“as many opinions as men”), and a 
hundred more; but they required for their appreciation a philosophical intel- 
ligence or literary sensitivity which the African slave found wanting in the 
Roman plebs. It did not care for his comedies that were half tragedies, his 
well-built but slowly moving plots, his subtle studies of strange characters, 
his quiet dialogue and too even style, and the almost insulting purity of his 
^ language; it was as if the audience felt that a breach, never to be healed, had 
been opened between the people and the literature of Rome. Cicero, too 
near to Catullus to see him, and too prudent to relish Lucretius, thought 
Terence the finest poet of the Republic. Caesar estimated him more justly 
when he praised the “lover of pure speech,” but deplored the lack of 
vis cornea— power of laughter— in Terence, and called him dimidiatus 
Menander— 'hiXi a Menander.” One thing, nevertheless, Terence had 
achieved: this Semitic alien, inspired by Laelius and Greece, had molded 
the Latin language at last into a literary instrument that would in the next 
century make possible the prose of Cicero, and Virgil’s poetry. 


VI. CATO AND THE CONSERVATIVE; OPPOSITION 

This Greek invasion, in literature, philosophy, religion, science, and art, 
this revolution in manners, morals, and blood, filled old-fashioned Romans 
with disgust and dread. Out on a Sabine farm a retired senator, Valerius 
Flaccus, fretted over the decay of the Roman character, the corruption of 
politics, the replacement of the mos maiorum with Greek ideas and ways. 
He was too old to fight the tide himself. But on a near-by homestead, just 
outside Reate, was a young plebeian peasant who showed all the old Roman 
qualities, loved the soil, worked hard, saved carefully, lived with conserva- 
tive simplicity, and yet talked as brilliantly as a radical. He bore the names 
Marcus Porcius Cato: Porems because his family had for generations raised 
pigs; Cato because they had been shrewd. Flaccus encouraged him to study 
law; Cato did, and won his neighbors’ cases in the local courts. Flaccus 
advised him to go to Rome; Cato went, and by the age of thirty obtained 
the quaestorship (204). By 199 he was aedile, by 198 praetor, by 195 consul; 
In 19 1 tribune, in 184 censor. Meanwhile he served twenty-six years in the 



THE GREEK CONQUEST 


103 


CHAP. V) 

army as a fearless soldier and an able and mthless general. He considered 
discipline the mother of character and freedom; he despised a soldier “who 
plied his hands in marching and his feet in fighting, and whose snore was 
louder than his battle cr)^”; but he won the respect of his troops by marching 
beside them on foot, giving each of them a pound of silver from the spoils, 
and keeping nothing for himself.^^ 

In the intervals of peace he denounced rhetors and rhetoric, and became 
the most powerful orator of his time. The Romans listened in reluctant 
fascination, for no one had ever spoken to them with such obvious honesty 
and stinging wit; the lash of his tongue might fall upon any man present, 
but it was pleasant to see it descend upon one’s neighbor. Cato fought cor- 
ruption recklessly, and seldom let the sun set without having made new 
enemies. Few loved him, for his scar-covered face and wild red hair dis- 
concerted them, his big teeth threatened them, his asceticism shamed them, 
his industry left them lagging, his green eyes looked through their words 
into their selfishness. Forty-four times his patrician enemies tried to destroy 
him by public indictments; forty-four times he was saved by the votes of 
farmers who, like him, resented venality and luxur\^^^ When their votes 
made him censor, all Rome shuddered. He carried out the threats with 
which he had won the campaign; laid heavy taxes upon luxuries, fined a 
senator for extravagance, and excluded from the Senate six members in 
whose record he found malfeasance. He expelled Alanilius for kissing his 
wife in public; as for himself, he said, he never embraced his wife except 
when it thundered— though he was glad when it thundered. He completed 
the drainage system of the city, cut the pipes that had clandestinely tapped 
water from the public aqueducts or conduits, compelled owners to demolish 
the illegal projections of their buildings upon or over the public right of way, 
forced down the price paid by the state for public works, and frightened 
the tax collectors into remitting a larger share of their receipts to the Treas- 
ury.^® After five years of heroic opposition to the nature of man, he retired 
from office, made successful investments, manned his now vast farm with 
slaves, lent money at usurious rates, bought slaves cheap and— after training 
them in some skill— sold them dear, and became so nch that he could afford 
to write books— an occupation he despised. 

Cato was the first great writer of Latin prose. He began by publishing 
his own speeches. Then he issued a manual of orator)', demanded a rugged 
Roman style instead of the Isocratean smoothness of the rhetors, and set a 
theme for Quintilian by defining the orator as vir bonus dicendi peritus “a 
good man sldlled in speaking” (but was there ever union so rare? ) . He put 
his farming experiences to use by composing a treatise De agri cidtura— the 



104 CAESAR AND CHRIST (CHAP. V 

only work of Cato, and the oldest literary Latin, that time has saved. It is 
written in a simple and vigorous style, pithily compact; Cato wastes no 
words, and seldom condescends to a conjunction. He gives detailed advice 
on buying and selling slaves (old ones should be sold before they become 
a loss), on renting land to share-croppers, on viticulture and aboriculture, 
on domestic management and industries, on making cement and cooking 
dainties, on curing constipation and diarrhea, on healing snakebite with the 
dung of swine, and offering sacrifice to the gods. Asking himself what is the 
wisest use of agricultural land, he answers, “Profitable cattle raising.” The 
next best? “Moderately profitable cattle raising.” The third best? “Very 
unprofitable cattle raising.” The fourth? “To plow the land.” This was the 
argument that gave the latifundia to Italy. 

The most important of his books was probably the lost Origines, a brave 
attempt to deal with the antiquities, ethnology, institutions, and history of 
Italy from the beginnings to the very year of Cato’s death. Nearly all that 
we know of it is that, to spite the aristocracy through its touted ancestors, 
the author named no generals in it, but lauded by name an elephant that had 
fought well against Pyrrhus.^" Cato designed this work, and his essays on 
oratory, agriculture, sanitation, military science, and law, to form an ency- 
clopedia for the education of his son. By writing in Latin he hoped to dis- 
place the Greek textbooks that were in his judgment warping the minds of 
Roman youth. Though he himself studied Greek, he seems to have been 
sincere in his conviction that an education in Greek literature and philosophy 
would so rapidly dissolve the religious beliefs of young Romans that then- 
moral life would be left defenseless against the instincts of acquisition, pug- 
nacity, and sex. His condemnation, like Nietzsche’s, took in Socrates; that 
prattling old midwife, Cato thought, had been rightly poisoned for under- 
mining the morals and laws of Athens.^® Even Greek physicians irked him; 
he preferred the old household remedies, and distrusted the ever-ready 
surgeons. 

The Greeks [he wrote to his son] are an intractable and iniquitous 
race. You may take my word for it that when this people bestows its 
literature upon Rome it will ruin eveiy thing. . . . And all the sooner 
if it sends us its physicians. They have conspired among themselves 
to murder all “barbarians.” ... I forbid you to have anything to do 
with physicians.'*'^ 

Having these ideas, he w-as a natural antagonist of the Scipionic circle, 
which thought the spread of Greek literature in Rome a necessary ferment 
in lifting Latin letters and the Roman mind to a fuller growth. Cato lent his 
aid to the prosecution of Africanus and his brother; the laws against embez- 



CHAP.V) THE GREEK CONQUEST 105 

zlement should be no respecters of persons. Toward foreign states, with one 
exception, he advocated a policy of justice and nonintervention. Despising 
Greeks, he respected Greece; and when the imperialistic plunderers in the 
Senate were for waging war upon rich Rhodes, he made a decisive speech in 
favor of conciliation. The exception, as all the world knows, was Carthage. 
Sent there on an official mission in 175, he had been shocked by the rapid 
recovery of the city from the effects of the Hannibalic war, the fruitful 
orchards and vineyards, the wealth that poured in from revived commerce, 
the arms that mounted in the arsenals. On his return he held up before the 
Senate a bundle of fresh figs that he had plucked in Carthage three days 
before, as an ominous symbol of her prosperity and her nearness to Rome; 
and he predicted that if Carthage were left unchecked, she would soon be 
rich and strong enough to renew the struggle for the mastery of the Medi- 
terranean. From that day, with characteristic pertinacity, he ended all his 
speeches in the Senate, on whatever subject, with his dour conviction; 
Ceterum censeo delendum esse Carthaginein—^^tsidts, I think that Carthage 
must be destroyed.” The imperialists in the Senate agreed with him, not so 
much because they coveted Carthage’s trade, as because they saw in the 
well-irrigated fields of north Africa a new investment for their money, new 
latifundia to be tilled by new slaves. They awaited eagerly a pretext for 
the Third Punic War. 


vn. CARTHAGO DELETA 

Their cue came from the most extraordinary ruler of his time. Af asinissa. 
King of Numidia, lived ninety years (238-148), begot a son at eighty-six,^® 
and by a vigorous regimen kept his health and strength almost to the end. 
He organized his nomad people into a settled agricultural society and a 
disciplined state, ruled them ably for sixty years, adorned Cirta, his capital, 
with lordly architecture, and left as his tomb the great pyramid that still 
stands near the town of Constantine, in Tunisia. Having won the friendship 
of Rome, and knowing the political weakness of Carthage, he repeatedly 
raided and appropriated Carthaginian terrain, took Great Leptis and other 
cities, and finally controlled all land approaches to the harassed metropolis. 
Bound by treaty to make no war without Rome’s consent, Carthage sent 
ambassadors to the Senate to protest against Masinissa’s encroachments. The 
Senate reminded them that all Phoenicians were interlopers in Africa and 
had no rights there which any well-armed nation was obliged to respect. 
When Carthage paid the last of her fifty annual indemnities of 200 talents to 
Rome, she felt herself released from the treaty signed after Zama. In 1 5 1 she 



CAESAR AND CHRIST 


io6 


(chap. V 


declared war against Numidia, and a year later Rome declared war against 
her. 

The latter declaration, and the news that the Roman fleet had already 
sailed for Africa, reached Carthage at the same time. The ancient city, how- 
ever rich in population and trade, was quite unprepared for a major war. 
She had a small army, a smaller navy, no mercenaries, no allies. Rome con- 
trolled the sea. Utica therefore declared for Rome, and Masinissa blocked 
all egress from Carthage to the hinterland. An embassy hastened to Rome 
with authority to meet all demands. The Senate promised that if Carthage 
would turn over to the Roman consuls in Sicily 300 children of the noblest 
families as hostages, and would obey whatever orders the consuls would 
give, the freedom and territorial integrity of Carthage would be preserved. 
Secretly the Senate bade the consuls carry out the instructions that they 
had already received. The Carthaginians gave up their children with fore- 
bodings and laments; the relatives crowded the shores in a despondent 
farewell; at the last moment the mothers tried by force to prevent the ships 
from sailing; and some swam out to sea to catch a last glimpse of their 
children. The consuls sent the hostages to Rome, crossed to Utica with 
army and fleet, summoned the Carthaginian ambassadors, and required of 
Carthage the surrender of her remaining ships, a great quantity of grain, 
and all her engines and weapons of war. When these conditions had been 
fulfilled, the consuls further demanded that the population of Carthage 
should retire to ten miles from the city, which was then to be burned to 
the ground. The ambassadors argued in vain that the destruction of a city 
which had surrendered hostages and its arms without striking a blow was 
a treacherous atrocity unknown to history. They offered their own lives as 
a vicarious atonement; they flung themselves upon the ground and beat the 
earth with their heads. The consuls rephed that the terms were those of the 
Senate and could not be changed. 

When the people of Carthage heard what was demanded of them they 
lost their sanity. Parents mad with grief tore limb from limb the leaders 
who had advised surrendering the child hostages; others killed those who 
had counseled the surrender of arms; some dragged the returning ambas- 
sadors through the streets and stoned them; some killed whatever Italians 
could be found in the city; some stood in the empty arsenals and wept. The 
Carthaginian Senate declared war against Rome and called all adults— men 
and women, slave or free— to form a new army, and to forge anew the 
weapons of defense. Fury gave them resolution. Public buildings were 
demolished to provide metal and timber; the statues of cherished gods 
were melted down to make swords, and the hair of the women was shorn 
to make ropes. In two months the beleaguered city produced 8000 shields, 



CHAP.V) THE GREEK CONQUEST IO7 

18.000 swords, 30,000 spears, 60,000 catapult missiles, and built in its inner 
harbor a fleet of 120 ships.^® 

Three years the city stood siege by land and sea. Again and again the 
consuls led their armies against the walls, but always they were repulsed; 
only Scipio Aemilianus, one of the military tribunes, proved resourceful 
and brave. Late in 147 the Roman Senate and Assembly made him consul and 
commander, and even Cato approved. Soon afterward Laelius succeeded 
in scaling the walls. The Carthaginians, though weakened and decimated 
by starvation, fought for their city street by street, through six days of 
slaughter without quarter. Harassed by snipers, Scipio ordered all captured 
streets to be fired and leveled to the ground. Hundreds of concealed Cartha- 
ginians perished in the conflagration. At last the population, reduced from 

500.000 to 55,000, surrendered. Hasdrubal, their general, pleaded for his 
life, which Scipio granted, but his wife, denouncing his cowardice, plunged 
with her sons into the flames. The survivors were sold as slaves, and the city 
was turned over to the legions for pillage. Reluctant to raze it, Scipio sent 
to Rome for final instructions; the Senate replied that not only Carthage, 
but all such of her dependencies as had stood by her were to be completely 
destroyed, that the soil should be plowed and sown with salt, and a formal 
curse laid upon any man who should attempt to build upon the site. For 
seventeen days the city burned. 

There was no treaty of peace, for the Carthaginian state no longer existed. 
Utica and other African cities that had helped Rome were left free under 
a protectorate; the remainder of Carthage’s territory became the province 
of “Africa.” Roman capitalists came in to divide the land into latiftmdia, 
and Roman merchants fell heir to Carthaginian trade. Imperialism became 
now the frank and conscious motive of Roman pohtics. Syracuse was 
absorbed into the province of Sicily, southern Gaul was subdued as a neces- 
sary land route to completely subjected Spain, and the Hellenistic mon- 
archies of Egypt and Syria were quietly induced— like Antiochus IV by 
Popilius— to submit to the wishes of Rome. From the moral standpoint, 
which is always a window dressing in international politics, the destruction 
of Carthage and Corinth in 1 46 must rank among the most brutal conquests 
in history; from the standpoint of empire— of security and wealth— it laid 
simultaneously the two cornerstones of Rome’s commercial and naval 
supremacy. From that moment the pohtical history of the Mediterranean 
flowed through Rome. 

In the midst of the war its chief instigators had died in the fullness of 
victory— Cato in 149, Masinissa in 148. The old censor had left a deep mark 
upon Roman history. Men would look back to him for many centuries as 



I 08 CAESAR AND CHRIST (cHAP. V 

the typical Roman of the Republic: Cicero would idealize him in De Scnec- 
tute; his great-great-grandson would reincarnate his philosophy without his 
humor; Marcus Aurelius would mold himself upon his example; Pronto 
would call upon Latin literature to return to the simplicity and directness 
of his style. Nevertheless, the destruction of Carthage was his only success. 
His war against Hellenism completely failed; every department of Roman 
letters, philosophy, oratory, science, art, religion, morals, manners, and 
dress surrendered to Greek influence. He hated Greek philosophers; his 
famous descendant would surround himself with them. The religious faith 
that he had lost continued to decline despite his efforts to reanimate it. Above 
all, the political corruption that he had fought in his youth grew wider and 
deeper as the stakes of office rose with the Empire’s spread; every new 
conquest made Rome richer, more rotten, more merciless. She had won 
every war but the class war; and the destruction of Carthage removed the 
last check to civil division and strife. Now through a hundred bitter years 
of revolution Rome would pay the penalty of gaining the world. 



BOOK II 

THE REVOLUTION 


145-30 B.C. 



CHRONOLOGICAL TABLE 


B.C. 

139: First Sert'ile War in Sicily 
133; Tribunate and assassination of Ti- 
berius Gracchus 

132: FI. Lucilius; Panaetius in Rome 
1 24-1 23: Caius Gracchus tribune 

122: C. Gracchus introduces state dis- 
tribution of corn 
121: Suicide of C. Gracchus 
1 19: Marius tribune; 116: praetor 
113-101: Wars against Cimbri and Teutones 
1 12-105: The Jugurthine War 
107, 1 04- 1 00, 87: Marius consul 

106: Birth of Cicero and Pompey 
105: Cimbri defeat Romans near Arausio 
103-99: Second Sertnle War in Sicily 
103-100: Satuminus tribune 

102: Marius defeats Cimbri at Aquae Sex- 
tiae 

100: Marius suppresses Satuminus; birth 
of Julius Caesar 

91: Reforms and assassination of M. 
Livius Drusus 

91-89: The Social War in Italy 
88: Sulla consul; flight of Marius 
88-84: First Mithridatic War 

87: Rebellion of Cinna and Marius; radi- 
cal reign of terror 

86: Sulla takes Athens and defeats Ar- 
chelaus at Chaeronea 
86: Marius and Cinna depose Sulla; 
death of Marius 

85-84: Third and fourth consulates, and 
death of Cinna 

83-81: Second Mithridatic War 
83: Sulla lands at Brundisium 
82: Sulla takes Rome; reactionary reign 
of terror 

81: Leges Comeliae of Sulla 
80-72: Revolt of Sertorius in Spain 

79: Resignation and, 78: death, of Sulla 
76: FI. Varro 

75-63: Third Mithridatic War; victories of 
Lucullus and Pompey 
75: Cicero quaestor in Sicily 
73-71: Third Ser\nle War; Spartacus 
70: First consulate of Crassus and Pom- 
pey; trial of Verres; Virgil b. 

69: Tims Pomponius Atticus 
68: Caesar quaestor in Spain 
67: Pompey subdues the pirates 
66: Cicero Pro lege Manilia 
63: Cicero exposes Catiline; Octavius b. 
63-12: M. V. Agrippa, engineer 

62: Caesar praetor; misconduct of 
Clodius 


61: Caesar gov. of Further Spain; re- 
mrn and triumph of Pompey 
60: First Triumvirate: Caesar, Crassus, 
Pompey 

60-54: Poems of Camllus; Cornelius Nepos 
59: Caesar consul; Lucretius’ De reriim 
natura 

58: Clodius, tribune, exiles Cicero; 
Caesar defeats Helvetii and Ario- 
vistus in Gaul 

57: Remm of Cicero; Caesar defeats 
Belgae 

56: Meeting of triumvirs at Luca 
55: Pompey and Crassus consuls; thea- 
ter of Pompey; Caesar in Germany 
and Britain 

54: Caesar’s second invasion of Britain 
53: Violence of Clodius and Milo in 
Rome; defeat of Crassus at Carrhae 
52: Murder of Clodius; trial of Milo; 
Pompey sole consul; revolt of 
Vercingetorix 

51: Cicero governor of Cilicia; Cicero’s 
De re publica; Caesar’s De hello 
Galileo 

49; Caesar crosses Rubicon and takes 
Rome 

48: Battles of Dyrrachium and Phar- 
salus 

48-47; Caesar in Egx’pt and Syria; Vitru- 
vius, architect; Columella, botanist 
47: Caesar’s victories at Zela and Thap- 
sus; suicide of Cato the Younger 

■ 46: Caesar appointed dictator for ten 

vears; revision of calendar; Sallust, 
historian; Cicero Pro Marcello 
45: Caesar defeats the Pompeians in 
Spain; Cicero’s Academica and 
De finibiis 

44: Assassination of Caesar; Cicero’s 
Dispzitationes Tusciilanae, De na- 
fiira deorsnn, De officiis 
43: Second Triumvirate: Antony, Oc- 
tavian, Lepidus; murder of Cicero 
42 : Brums and Cassius die at Philippi 
41: Antony and Cleopatra at Tarsus 
40: Reconciliation of Antony and Oc- 
tavian at Bmndisium; Virgil’s 
Fourth Eclogue 
36: Antony invades Parthia 
32: Antony marries Cleopatra 
31: Octavian defeats Antony at Actium 
30: Suicide of Antony and Cleopatra; 
Egypt annexed to the Empire; Oc- 
tavian sole mler of Rome 



CHAPTER VI 


The Agrarian Revolt 

145-78 B.C. 


I. THE BACKGROUND OF REVOLUTION 

T he causes of revolution were many, the results were endless, the 
personalities thrown up by the crisis,* from the Gracchi to Augustus, 
were among the most powerful in history. Never before, and never again 
till our own time, were such stakes fought for, never was the world drama 
more intense. The first cause was the influx of slave-grown corn from Sicily, 
Sardinia, Spain, and Africa, which ruined many Italian farmers by reducing 
the price of domestic grains below the cost of production and marketing. 
Second, was the influx of slaves, displacing peasants in the countryside and 
free workers in the towns. Third, was the growth of large farms. A law of 
220 forbade senators to take contracts or invest in commerce; flush with 
the spoils of war, they bought up extensive tracts of agricultural land. Con- 
quered soil was sometimes sold in small plots to colonists, and eased urban 
strife; more of it was given to capitalists in part payment of their war loans 
to the state; most of it was bought or leased by senators or businessmen on 
terms fixed by the Senate. To compete with these latijundia the little man 
had to borrow money at rates that insured his inability to pay; slowly he 
sank into poverty or bankruptcy, tenancy or the slums. Finally, the peasant 
himself, after he had seen and looted the world as a soldier, had no taste or 
patience for the lonely labor and unadventurous chores of the farm; he 
preferred to join the turbulent proletariat of the city, watch without cost 
the exciting games of the amphitheater, receive cheap com from the govern- 
ment, sell his vote to the highest bidder or promiser, and lose himself in the 
impoverished and indiscriminate mass. 

Roman society, once a community of free farmers, now rested more and 
more upon external plunder and internal slavery. In the city all domestic 
service, many handicrafts, most trade, much banking, nearly all factory 
labor, and labor on public works, were performed by slaves, reducing the 
wages of free workers to a point where it was almost as profitable to be idle 
as to toil. On the latificndia slaves were preferred because they were not 
subject to mihtary service, and their number could be maintained, genera- 

III 



112 CAESAR AND CHRIST ( CHAP. VI 

tion after generation, as a by-product of their only pleasure or their master’s 
vice. All the Mediterranean region was raided to produce living machines 
for these industrialized farms; to the war prisoners led in after every vic- 
torious campaign were added the victims of pirates who captured slaves or 
freemen on or near the coasts of Asia, or of Roman officials whose organized 
man hunts impressed into bondage any provincial whom the local authorities 
did not dare protect.^ Every week slave dealers brought their human prey 
from Africa, Spain, Gaul, Germany, the Danube, Russia, Asia, and Greece 
to the ports of the Mediterranean and the Black Sea. It was not unusual for 
10,000 slaves to be auctioned off at Delos in a single day. In 177, 40,000 
Sardinians, in 167, 150,000 Epirotes, were captured by Roman armies and 
sold as slaves, in the latter case at approximately a dollar a head.“ In the city 
the lot of the slave was mitigated by humanizing contacts with his master 
and by hope of emancipation; but on the large farms no human relation 
interfered with exploitation. There the slave was no longer a member of 
the household, as in Greece or early Rome; he seldom saw his owner; and 
the rewards of the overseer depended upon squeezing every possible profit 
from the chattels entrusted to his lash. The wages of the slave on the great 
estates were as much food and clothing as would enable him to toil from 
sunrise to sunset every day— barring occasional holidays— until senility. If 
he complained or disobeyed, he worked with chains about his ankles and 
spent the night in an ergastulum—z subterranean dungeon that formed a 
part of nearly every latifundium. It was a wasteful as well as a brutal system, 
for it supported hardly a twentieth of the families that once had lived on 
the same acreage as freemen. 

If we remember that at least half these slaves had once been free (for 
slaves seldom fought in the wars), we can surmise the bitterness of these 
broken lives, and must marvel at the rarity of their revolts. In 196 the rural 
slaves and free workers of Etruria rebelled; they were beaten down by 
Roman legions and, Livy tells us, “many were killed or taken prisoners; 
others were scourged and crucified.”® In 185 a like uprising occurred in 
Apuha; 7000 slaves were captured and condemned to mines.^ In the mines 
of New Carthage alone 4000 Spaniards worked as slaves. In 139 the “First 
Servile War” broke out in Sicily. Four hundred slaves accepted the call of 
Eunus and massacred the free population in the town of Enna; slaves poured 
from the farms and private dungeons of Sicily and sv^elled the number of 
the rebels to 70,000. They occupied Agrigentum, defeated the forces of the 
Roman praetor, and held nearly all the island till 1 3 1, when a consular army 
penned them into Enna and starved them into surrender. Eunus was taken 
to Rome, dropped into an underground cell, and allowed to die of hunger 
and Hce.® In 133 lesser uprisings resulted in the execution of 150 slaves in 



THE AGRARIAN REVOLT 


”3 


CHAP. Vl) 

Rome, 450 in Mintumae, 4000 in Sinuessa. In that year Tiberius Gracchus 
passed the agrarian law that opened the Roman Revolution. 


II. TIBERIUS GRACCHUS 

He was the son of the Tiberius Sempronius Gracchus who had earned the 
gratitude of Spain by his generous administration, had served twice as 
consul and once as censor, and had saved the brother and married the 
daughter of Scipio Africanus. Cornelia gave him twelve children, all but 
three of whom died in adolescence; and his own death left upon her the 
burden of rearing Tiberius and Caius and a daughter— also named Cornelia— 
who became the wife of Scipio Aemilianus. Both parents shared in the 
Hellenistic culture and sympathies of the Scipionic circle. Cornelia gathered 
about her a literary salon, and wrote letters of so pure and elegant a style 
that they were reckoned as a distinguished contribution to Latin literature. 
An Egyptian king, says Plutarch, offered her his hand and throne in her 
widowhood, but she refused; she preferred to remain the daughter of one 
Scipio, the mother-in-law of another, and the mother of the Gracchi. 

Brought up in the atmosphere of statesmanship and philosophy, Tiberius 
and Caius Gracchus knew both the problems of Roman government and 
the speculations of Greek thought. They were particularly influenced by 
Blossius, a Greek philosopher from Cumae, who helped to inspire in them 
a passionate liberalism that underestimated the power of the conservatives 
in Rome. The brothers were almost equally ambitious, proud, sincere, elo- 
quent beyond reason, and brave without stint. Caius tells how Tiberius had 
the agrarian tragedy borne in upon him when, passing through Etruria, he 
“noted the dearth of inhabitants, and observed that those who tilled the 
soU and tended the flocks were foreign slaves.” ® Knowing that at that time 
only property holders could serve in the army, Tiberius asked himself 
how Rome could preserve its leadership or independence if the sturdy peas- 
ants that had once filled its legions were displaced by desolate and alien 
bondsmen. How could Roman life and democracy ever be healthy with a 
city proletariat festering in poverty, instead of a proud yeomanry owning 
and tilling the land? A distribution of land among the poorer citizens seemed 
the obvious and necessary solution of three problems: rural slavery, urban 
congestion and corruption, and military decay. 

Early in 1 3 3 Tiberius Gracchus, elected a tribune of the people, announced 
his intention to submit to the Tribal Assembly three proposals: (i) that no 
citizen should be permitted to hold more than 333— or, if he had two sons, 
667— acres of land bought or rented from the state; (2) that all other public 



II 4 CAESAR AND CHRIST (cHAP. VI 

lands that had been sold or leased to private individuals should be returned 
to the state for the purchase or rental price plus an allowance for improve- 
ments madej and (3) that the returned lands should be divided into twenty- 
acre lots among poor citizens, on condition that they agree never to sell 
their allotment, and to pay an annual tax on it to the Treasurv^. It was not 
a utopian scheme; it was merely an attempt to implement the Licinian laws 
passed in 367 b.c., which had never been repealed and never enforced. “The 
beasts of the field and the birds of the air,” said Tiberius to the poorer 
plebeians in one of the epochal orations in Roman history, 

have their holes and their hiding places; but the men who fight and 
die for Italy enjoy only the fight and the air. Our generals urge then- 
soldiers to fight for the graves and shrines of their ancestors. The 
appeal is idle and false. You cannot point to a paternal altar. You have 
no ancestral tomb. You fight and die to give wealth and lu.xury to 
others. You are called the masters of the world, but there is not a foot 
of ground that you can call your own.'^ 

The Senate denounced the proposals as confiscatory, charged Tiberius with 
seeking a dictatorship, and persuaded Octavius, another tribune, to prevent 
by his veto the submission of the bills to the Assembly. Gracchus thereupon 
moved that any tribune who acted contrary to the wishes of his constituents 
should be immediately deposed. The Assembly passed the measure, and 
Octavius was forcibly removed from the tribune’s bench by the lictors of 
Tiberius. The original proposals were then voted into law; and the Assem- 
bly, fearing for Gracchus’ safety, escorted him home.® 

His illegal overruling of the tribunician veto, which the Assembly itself 
had long ago made absolute, gave his opponents a handle with which to 
frustrate him. They declared their purpose to impeach him at the end of 
his one-year term, as having violated the constitution and used force against 
a tribune. To protect himself he flouted the constitution further by seeking 
re-election to the tribunate for 132. As Aemilianus and Laelius and other 
senators who had defended his proposals now withdrew their support, he 
turned more completely to the plebs. He promised, if re-elected, to shorten 
the term of military service, to abolish the exclusive right of senators to act 
as jurors, and to admit the Italian allies to Roman citizenship. Meanwhile 
the Senate refused funds to the agrarian commission that had been appointed 
to execute Tiberius’ laws. Y\Ten Attalus III of Pergamum bequeathed his 
kin gdom to Rome (133), Gracchus proposed to the Assembly that the 
personal and movable property of Attalus should be sold and the proceeds 
distributed to the recipients of state lands to finance the equipment of their 
farms. The proposal infuriated the Senate, which saw its authority over the 



THE AGRARIAN REVOLT 


CHAP. Vl) 


II5 


provinces and the public purse being transferred to an unmanageable and 
unrepresentative Assembly largely of servile origin and alien stock. When 
election day came, Gracchus appeared in the Forum with armed guards and 
in mourning costume, implying that his defeat would mean his impeachment 
and death. As the voting proceeded, violence broke out on both sides. Scipio 
Nasica, crying that Tiberius wished to make himself king, led the senators, 
armed with clubs, into the Forum. The supporters of Gracchus, awed by 
patrician robes, gave way; Tiberius was killed by a blow on the head, and 
several hundred of his followers perished with him. When his younger 
brother Gains asked permission to bury him he was refused, and the bodies 
of the dead rebels were thrown into the Tiber, while Comeha mourned. 

The Senate sought to mollify the bitter plebs by consenting to the enforce- 
ment of the Gracchan laws. An increase of 76,000 in the register of citi- 
zens from 1 3 1 to 125 suggests that a large number of land allotments was 
actually made. But the agrarian commission found itself faced by many 
difficulties. Much of the land in question had been obtained from the state 
years or generations back and its present possessors claimed rights estab- 
lished and sanctified by time. Many parcels had been bought by new owners, 
for a substantial price, from those who had bought them cheaply from the 
government. The landowners in Italian allied states, whose squatter rights 
were imperiled by the laws, appealed to Scipio Aemilianus to defend them 
against the land board; and through his influence its operations were sus- 
pended. Public opinion flamed out against him; he was denounced as a 
traitor to the already sacred memory of Gracchus; and one morning in 129 
he was discovered dead in Ifis bed, apparently the victim of an assassin, who 
was never found. 


III. CAIUS GRACCHUS 

Ruthless gossip accused Cornelia of conspiring with her daughter, Scipio’s 
deformed and unloved wife, to murder him. In the face of these calamities 
she sought consolation by devoting herself to her surviving son, the last of 
her “jewels.” The murder of Tiberius aroused in Gains no mere spirit of 
vengeance, but a resolve to complete his brother’s work. He had served 
with intelligence and courage under Aemilianus at Numantia, and he had 
won the admiration of all groups by the integrity of his conduct and the 
simplicity of his life. His passionate temperament, all the more vehement on 
occasion because so long controlled, made him the greatest of Roman orators 
before Cicero, and opened almost any office to him in a society where 
eloquence served only next to bravery in the advancement of men. In the 
fall of 1 24 he was elected tribune. 



Il6 CAESAR AND CHRIST (cHAP. VI 

More realistic than Tiberius, Caius understood that no reform can endure 
which is opposed by the balance of economical or political power in the 
state. He aimed to bring five classes to his support; the peasantry, the army, 
the proletariat, and the businessmen. He won the first by renewing the 
agrarian legislation of his brother, extending its application to state-owned 
land in the provinces, restoring the land board, and personally attending to 
its operations. He fed the ambitions of the middle classes by estabhshing 
new colonies in Capua, Tarentum, Narbo, and Carthage, and by developing 
these as thriving centers of trade. He pleased the soldiers by passing a 
bill that they should be clothed at the public expense. He gained the grati- 
tude of the urban masses by his lex fnmtentaria, or com law, which com- 
mitted the government to distribute wheat at six and one third asses per 
modius (thirty-nine cents a peck— half the market price) to all who asked 
for it. It was a measure shocking to old Roman ideas of self-reliance, and 
destined to play a vital role in Roman history. Caius believed that the grain 
dealers were charging the public twice the cost of production, and that his 
measure, through the economy of unified operation, would involve no loss 
to the state. In any case, the law turned the poor freemen of Rome from 
client supporters of the aristocracy into defenders of the Gracchi, as later 
of Marius and Caesar; it was the foundation stone of that democratic move- 
ment which would reach its peak in Clodius, and die at Actium. 

Caius’ fifth measure sought to assure the power of his party by ending 
the tradition whereby the richer classes in the Centurial Assembly voted 
first; hereafter the centuries were on each occasion to vote in an order 
determined by lot. He appeased the business class by giving them the exclu- 
sive right to serv'e as jurors in trials for provincial malfeasance; i.e., they were 
hereafter to be in large measure their own judges. He whetted their appe- 
tites by proposing a tax of one tenth, to be collected by them, on all the 
produce of Asia Minor. He enriched contractors, and reduced unemploy- 
ment, by a program of road building in every part of Italy. Altogether these 
laws, despite the political trickery that colored some of them, formed the 
most constructive body of legislation offered to Rome before Caesar. 

Armed with such varied support, Caius was able to override custom and 
win election to a second and successive tribunate. Probably it was now that 
he sought to “pack” the Senate by adding to its 300 members 300 more to be 
chosen from the business class by the Assembly. He proposed also to extend 
the full franchise to all the freemen of Latium, and a partial franchise to 
the remaining freemen of Italy. This, his boldest move toward a broader 
democracy, was his first strategic error. The voters showed no enthusiasm 
for sharing their privileges, even with men of whom only a small minority 
could have attended their assemblies in Rome. The Senate acted on its 



CHAP.Vl) THE AGRARIAN REVOLT I17 

opportunity. Almost ignored by Caius, and reduced to apparent impotence, 
it saw in the brilliant tribune only a demagogic tyrant extending his personal 
power through the reckless distribution of state property and funds. Sud- 
denly finding an ally in the jealous proletariat of Rome, and taking advantage 
of Caius’ absence in estabhshing his colony at Carthage, the Senatorial party 
suggested to another tribune, Marcus Livius Drusus, that he should win 
over the new peasantry by a bill canceling the tax laid upon their lands in 
the Gracchan laws; and that he should at once please and weaken the 
proletariat by proposing the formation of twelve new colonies in Italy, each 
to take 3000 men from Rome. The Assembly readily passed the bills; and 
when Caius returned he found his leadership challenged at every step by 
the popular Drusus. He sought a third term as tribune but was defeated; 
his friends charged that he had been elected but that the ballots had been 
falsified. He counseled his followers against violence and retired to private 
fife. 

In the following year the Senate proposed the abandonment of the colony 
at Carthage; all sides interpreted the measure, openly or privately, as the 
first move in a campaign to repeal the Gracchan laws. Some of Caius’ adher- 
ents attended the Assembly armed, and one of them cut down a conservative 
who threatened to lay hands upon Caius. On the morrow the senators 
appeared in full battle array, each with two armed slaves, and attacked the 
popular party entrenched on the Aventine. Caius did his best to quiet the 
tumult and avert further violence. Failing, he fled across the Tiber; over- 
taken, he ordered his servant to kill him; the slave obeyed and then killed 
himself, A friend cut off Caius’ head, filled it with molten lead, and brought 
it to the Senate, which had offered a reward of its weight in gold.® Of Caius’ 
supporters 250 fell in the fight, 3000 more were put to death by Senatorial 
decree. The city mob that he had befriended made no protest when his 
corpse, and those of his followers, were flung into the river; it was busy 
plundering his house.^® The Senate forbade Cornelia to wear mour ning for 
her son. 

rv. MARIUS 

The triumphant aristocracy devoted its subtlest intelligence to undoing 
the constructive, rather than the demagogic, elements in Caius’ legislation. 
It did not dare eject the business class from the juries, or the contractors 
and publicans from their happy hunting ground in Asia; and it allowed the 
com dole to stand as insurance against revolution. Into an otherwise attrac- 
tive measure it inserted a clause permitting the recipients of the new lands 
to sell them; soon thousands of holders sold to the great slaveowners, and 



CAESAR AND CHRIST 


Il8 


(chap. VI 


the latifundia resumed their growth. In 1 1 8 the land board was abolished. 
The masses in the capital raised^ no objection; they had decided that to eat 
state corn in the city was better than to sweat on the land or toil in pioneer 
colonies. Sloth combined with superstition (for the soil of Carthage had 
been cursed) to frustrate till Caesar the attempt to mitigate urban poverty 
by emigration. Wealth mounted, but it did not spread; in 1 04 b.c. a moderate 
democrat reckoned that only 2000 Roman citizens owned property.^^ “The 
condition of the poor,” says Appian, “became even worse than before. . . . 
The plebeians lost everything. . . . The number of citizens and soldiers 
continued to decline.” More and more the legions had to be filled out with 
conscripts from the Italian states; but these men had no stomach for fighting 
or no love for Rome. Desertions multiphed, discipline deteriorated, and the 
defense of the Republic sank to its lowest ebb. 

Consequently it was soon attacked, almost at the same time, on north 
and south. In 113 two Celtic tribes, the Cimbri and the Teutones, as if to 
give Rome a foretaste of its final fate, roUed down through Germany in a 
frightening avalanche of covered wagons— 300,000 fighting men, with their 
wives, children, and animals. Perhaps the wmrd had gone up over the Alps 
that Rome was in love with wealth and weary of war. The newcomers were 
tall and strong and fearless, so blond that the Italians described the children 
as having the white hair of old men. They met a Roman army at Noreia 
(now Neumarkt, in Carinthia) and destroyed it. They crossed the Rhine 
and defeated another Roman army; they poured west into southern Gaul and 
overcame a third, fourth, and fifth Roman army; at Arausio (Orange) 
80,000 legionnaires and 40,000 camp followers were left dead on the field.^® 
All Italy lay open to the invaders; and a terror rose in Rome such as it had 
not known since Hannibal. 

Almost at the same time war broke out in Numidia. When Jugurtha, 
grandson of Masinissa, tortured his brother to death, and tried to deprive 
his cousins of their share in the kingdom, the Senate declared war upon 
him (ill), with a view to making Numidia a province and opening it to 
Roman commerce and capital. Jugurtha bought patricians to defend his 
cause and crimes before the Senate, and bribed the generals sent against him 
into harmless activities or a favorable peace. Summoned to Rome, he opened 
his royal purse more lavishly, and was able to return unhindered to his 
capital.^* 

Only one ofiicer emerged from these campaigns with credit. Gains Marius, 
bom like Cicero at Arpinum, son of a day laborer, had enlisted in the army 
at an early age, had won his scars at Numantia, had married an aunt of 
Caesar, and despite, or because of, his lack of education or manners, had 
been chosen a tribune of the plebs. In the fall of 108 he returned from his 



THE AGRARIAN REVOLT 


CHAP. VI ) 


II9 


services as lieutenant to the incompetent Quintus Metellus in Africa, and 
ran for the consulate on a platform proposing that he should replace Metellus 
and bring the Jugurthine War to a successful end. He was elected, took 
command, and forced Jugurtha’s surrender (106) . The people did not learn 
at this time that the chief agent of this victory was a reckless young aristocrat, 
Lucius Sulla; they would hear from him later. Marius enjoyed a splendid tri- 
umph, and was so loved that the Assembly, ignoring a dying constitution, 
elected him consul year after year (104-100). The business classes sup- 
ported him partly because his victories opened new fields for their enter- 
prises, partly because he was clearly the only man who could repel the 
Celtic hordes. Rome already recognized in Caesar’s uncle the uses of Caesar- 
ism; the dictatorship of a popular leader backed by a devoted army seemed 
to many weary Romans the only alternative to the ohgarchic abuses of 
liberty. 

After their victory at Arausio, the Cimbri had reprieved Rome by cross- 
ing the Pyrenees and ravaging Spain. But in 102 they returned to Gaul, 
greater in number than before, and entered into an agreement with the 
Teutones for a simultaneous assault by separate routes upon the rich plains 
of northern Italy. To meet the peril Marius resorted to a new form of mili- 
tary enrollment, which revolutionized first the army and then the state. He 
invited the enlistment of any citizen, property owner or not; offered attrac- 
tive pay, and promised to release volunteers, and give them lands, after a 
completed campaign. The army now formed was composed chiefly of the 
city proletariat; its sentiments were hostile to the patrician Repubhc; it 
fought not for its country, but for its general and for booty; in this way, 
probably without knowing it, Marius laid the military basis of the Caesarian 
revolution. He was a soldier, not a statesman; he had no time to weigh distant 
political consequences. He led his recruits over the Alps, hardened their 
bodies with marches and drills, and developed their courage with attacks 
upon objectives that could be easily won; until they were trained he could 
not risk an engagement. The Teutones marched unhindered by his camp, 
asking the Romans derisively if they had messages for their wives in Rome, 
with whom the invaders proposed soon to refresh themselves; the number 
of the Teutones could be judged from the six days they took to pass the 
Roman camp. M’hen they had all filed by, Marius ordered his army to fall 
upon their rear. In the great battle that ensued at Aquae Sextiae (Aix in 
Provence), the new legions slew or captured 100,000 men (102). “They 
say,” Plutarch reports, “that the inhabitants of Marseilles made fences round 
their vineyards with the bones, and that the soil, after the bodies had rotted 
and the winter rains had fallen, was so fertilized with the putrefied matter 
which sank into it, that in the following season it yielded an unprecedented 



120 


CAESAR AND CHRIST 


(chap. VI 

crop.” After resting his army for several months, Marius led it back into 
Italy, and met the Cimbri at Vercellae, near the Po (loi), on the very field 
where Hannibal had won his first battle against Rome. The barbarians, to 
show their strength and courage, went naked in the snow, climbed over ice 
and through deep drifts to summits from which they tobogganed gaily 
along steep descents, using their shields as sleds.^® In the battle that followed 
they were nearly all slain. 

Marius was received in the rejoicing capital as a “second Camillus” who 
had turned back a Celtic invasion, and another Romulus who had refounded 
Rome. Part of the spoils he brought was bestowed upon him as a personal 
reward; thereby he became a rich man, with estates big “enough for a 
kingdom.” In loo he was elected consul for the sixth time. His colleague 
was Lucius Saturninus, a fiery radical who was resolved to achieve the goals 
of the Gracchi by law if possible, otherwise by force. He pleased Marius 
with a bill that bestowed colonial lands upon the veterans of the recent 
campaign, and Marius raised no objection when he lowered the price of 
state-doled com from six and one third asses (thirty-nine cents) to five 
sixths of an as (five cents) per modius, or peck. The Senate sought to pro- 
tect the Treasury and itself by having a tribune forbid the submission of 
these measures to a vote, but Saturninus proceeded with the voting neverthe- 
less. Violence flared up on both sides. When Saturninus’ bands killed Caius 
Memmius, one of the most respected of the aristocracy, the Senate took its 
final resort and, by a senatusconsultiiin de re publica dejendenda, ordered 
Marius, as consul, to suppress the revolt. 

Marius faced the bitterest choice of his life. It seemed a miserable end 
to his long career of service to the common people of Rome that he should 
now attack their leaders and his former friends. And yet he too distrusted 
the appeal to violence, and saw in revolution more ills than it could cure. 
He led a force against the rebels, let Saturninus be stoned to death, and then 
fled to a gloomy retirement, despised alike by the people he had championed 
and the aristocracy he had saved. 


V. THE REVOLT OF ITALY 

The revolution was now passing into civil war. V/hen the Senate asked for 
help against the Cimbri from the eastern kings allied with Rome, Nicomedes of 
Bithynia replied that all men of military value in his kingdom had been sold into 
slavery to satisfy the extortions of the Roman tax collectors. Preferring an army 
for the moment, the Senate decreed that all males enslaved for unpaid taxes 
should be freed. Hearing of this order, hundreds of slaves in Sicily, many of 



CHAP.Vl) THE AGRARIAN REVOLT I2I 

them Greeks from the Hellenistic East, left their masters and, gathering before 
the palace of the Roman praetor, demanded their freedom. Their owners pro- 
tested, and the praetor suspended the operation of the decree. The slaves or- 
ganized themselves under a religious impostor, Salvius, and attacked the town of 
Morgantia. The citizens there secured the loyalty of most of their slaves by 
promising to liberate them if they repelled the attack; they repelled it, but were 
not freed; and many of them joined the revolt. About the same time ( 103), some 
6000 slaves in the western end of the island rose under Athenion, a man of educa- 
tion and resolution. This force defeated army after army sent against it by the 
praetor, and moving eastward, merged with the rebels under Salvius. Together 
they mastered an army dispatched from Italy, but Salvius died in the moment of 
victory. Still other legions crossed the straits, under the consul Manius Aquilius 
(loi); Athenion engaged him in single combat and was killed; the leaderless 
slaves were overwhelmed; thousands of them died in the field, thousands were 
returned to their masters, hundreds were shipped to Rome to fight wild beasts 
in the games that celebrated Aquilius’ triumph. Instead of fighting, the slaves 
plunged their knives into one another’s hearts until all lay dead. 

A few years after this Second Servile war all Italy was in arms. For almost two 
centuries now Rome— a tiny nation between Cumae and Caere, between the 
Apennines and the sea— had ruled the rest of Italy as subject states. Even some 
cities close to Rome, like Tibur and Praeneste, had no representation in the 
government that ruled them. The Senate, the assemblies, and the consuls meted 
out decrees and laws to the Italian communities with the same high hand as to 
alien and conquered provinces. The resources and man power of the “allies” 
were drained by wars whose chief effect was to enrich a few families in Rome. 
Those states that had remained loyal to Rome in the ordeal with Hannibal had 
received scant reward; those that had helped him in any way had been punished 
with so servile a subjection that many of their freemen joined the slave revolts. 
A few rich men in the cities had been granted Roman citizenship; and the power 
of Rome had everywhere been used to support the rich against the poor. In 126 
the Assembly forbade the inhabitants of the Italian tov ns to migrate to Rome; 
and in 95 a decree of the jealous capital expelled all residents whose citizenship 
was not Roman but merely Italian. 

A member of the aristocracy paid with his life for trying to improve this situa- 
tion. M. Livius Drusus was the son of the tribune who had rivaled Tiberius 
Gracchus; since his adopted son became the father-in-law of Augustus, the 
family bound the beginnings of the revolution with its end. Elected tribune in 
91, he proposed three measures: (i) to divide more state lands among the poor; 
(2) to restore to the Senate its exclusive jury rights, but at the same time add 300 
equites, or businessmen, to the Senate; and (3) to confer Roman citizenship upon 
all the freemen of Italy. The Assembly passed the first bill with pleasure, the 
second with indifference; the Senate rejected both and declared them void. The 
third never reached a vote, for an unknown assassin stabbed Drusus to death in 
his home. 



122 


CAESAR AND CHRIST 


(chap. VI 


Aroused to hope by Drusus’ bill, and convinced by his fate that neither the 
Senate nor the Assembly would ever peaceably consent to share its privileges, 
the Italian states prepared for revolt. A federal republic was formed, Corfinium 
was named the capital, and the government was vested in a senate of 500 men 
chosen from all the Italian tribes except the Etruscans and Umbrians, who re- 
fused to join. Rome at once declared war upon the secessionists. All parties in the 
capital co-operated in what seemed to them a defense of the union; and every 
Roman dreaded the revenge the rebel states would take if they won this fratricidal 
“Social War.” * Marius emerged from his solitude, took command, and won 
victory after victory while all other Roman generals but Sulla met defeat. In 
three years of war 300,000 men fell, and central Italy was devastated. When 
Etruria and Umbria were on the verge of going over to the rebels, Rome pacified 
them by a grant of full Roman citizenship; and in 90 the Roman franchise was 
offered to all Italian freemen or freedmen who would swear fealty to Rome. 
These belated concessions weakened the allies; one town after another laid down 
its arms; and in 89 this ferocious and costly war ended in a sullen peace. The 
Romans nullified the franchise they had granted by enrolling the new citizens 
in ten new tribes, which voted only after the existing thirty-five, and therefore 
usually to no use; besides, only a few of the new citizens could attend the assem- 
blies in Rome. The deceived and desolate communities bided their time. Forty 
years later they would open their gates in welcome to a Caesar who offered 
them citizenship in a democracy that was dead. 


VI. SULLA THE HAPPY 

After a few years of peace the strife of Italians against Italians was resumed, 
merely changing its name from “Social” to “Civil,” and its scene from the 
towns to Rome. Lucius Cornelius Sulla was chosen one of the consuls for 
88, and took command of the army that was being prepared to march 
against Mithridates of Pontus. Sulpicius Rufus, a tribune, unwilling to put 
a conservative like Sulla in charge of so powerful a force, persuaded the 
Assembly to transfer the command to Marius, who, though fat and sixty- 
nine, was still rumbling with military ambition. Sulla refused to let his long- 
awaited chance for leadership slip by through what seemed to him the whim 
of an assembly spellbound by a demagogue and bribed, he was sure, by the 
merchants who liked Marius. He fled to Nola, won the army to his support, 
and marched at its head against Rome. 

Sulla was unique in his origins, character, and fate. Bom poor, he became 
the defender of the aristocracy, as the aristocratic Gracchi, Drusi, and 

• This is the time-honored mistranslation of Bellztm Sociale—tht War of the Allies (socii) 
against Rome. 



THE AGRARIAN REVOLT 


123 


CHAP. Vl) 

Caesar became leaders of the poor. He took his revenge upon life for having 
made him at once patrician and penniless; when he conquered money he 
made it serve his appetites without qualm or restraint. He was unprepos- 
sessing-glaring blue eyes in a white face mixed with rough blotches of fiery 
red, “like a mulberry sprinkled over with flour.” His education belied his 
looks. He was well versed in Greek as well as Roman literature, was a dis- 
criminate collector of art (usually by military means), had the works of 
Aristotle brought from Athens to Rome as part of his richest spoils, and 
found time, between war and revolution, to write his AIe?noirs for the mis- 
guidance of posterity. He was a jolly companion and a generous friend, 
devoted to wine, women, battle, and song. “He lived extravagantly,” says 
Sallust, “yet pleasure never interfered with his duties, except that his conduct 
as a husband might have been more honorable.” He made his way rapidly, 
above all in the army, his happiest medium; he treated his soldiers as com- 
rades, shared their work, their marches, and their dangers; “his only effort 
was not to allow anyone to surpass him in wisdom or bravery.” He 
believed in no gods, but many superstitions. Otherwise he was the most 
reahstic as well as the most ruthless of the Romans; his imagination and his 
feelings were always under the control of his intellect. It was said of him 
that he was half lion and half fox, and that the fox in him was more dan- 
gerous than the lion.®® Living half the time on battlefields, spending the last 
decade of his life in civil war, he nevertheless preserved his good humor to 
the end, graced his brutalities with epigrams, filled Rome with his laughter, 
made a hundred thousand enemies, achieved all his purposes, and died in bed. 

Such a man seemed chemically compounded of the virtues and vices 
needed to subdue revolution at home and Mithridates abroad. His 35,000 
trained men easily overcame the haphazard cohorts that Marius had impro- 
vised in Rome. Seeing his situation helpless, Marius escaped to Africa. 
Sulpicius was killed, betrayed by his servant; Sulla had the head of the 
tribune affixed to the rostrum that had lately rung with its eloquence; he 
rewarded the slave with freedom for his services, and death for his treachery. 
While his soldiers dominated the Forum he decreed that henceforth no 
measure should be offered to the Assembly except by permission of the 
Senate, and that the order of voting should be as in the “Servian constitu- 
tion,” which gave priority and advantage to the upper classes. He had 
himself chosen proconsul, allowed Cnaeus Octavius and Cornelius Cinna to 
be elected consuls (87), and then marched off to encounter Mithridates the 
Great. 

He had hardly left Italy when the struggle of the plebeian populares and 
the patrician and equestrian optiviates was resumed. The conservative sup- 
porters of Octavius fought in the Forum with the radical followers of Qnna, 



124 CAESAR AND CHRIST (CHAP. VI 

and in one day 10,000 men were killed. Octavius won, and Cinna fled to 
organize revolt in the neighboring towns. Marius, after a winter in hiding, 
sailed back to Italy, proclaimed freedom to slaves, and led a force of 6000 
men against Octavius in Rome. The rebels won, slaughtered thousands, 
adorned the rostra with the heads of slain senators, and paraded the streets 
with noble heads on their pikes as a model for later revolutions. Octavius 
accepted death calmly as he sat in his robes of office on his tribune’s chair. 
The carnage continued for five days and nights, the rebel terror for a year. 
A revolutionary tribunal subpoenaed patricians, condemned them if they 
had opposed Marius, and seized their property. A nod from Marius sufficed 
to send any man to death, usually by execution there and then. All of Sulla’s 
friends were slain; his property was confiscated; he was deposed from his 
command and was declared a pubhc enemy. The dead were refused burial 
and were left in the streets to be devoured by birds and dogs. The freed 
slaves plundered, raped, and killed indiscriminately, until Cinna gathered 
4000 of them together, surrounded them with Gallic soldiery, and had them 
butchered to death.-^ 

Cinna was now (86) chosen consul, for the second time, Marius for the 
sixth. In the first month of his new term Marius died, aged seventy-one, 
worn out with hardships and violence. Valerius Flaccus, elected in his stead, 
passed a bill canceling seventy-five per cent of all debts, and then left for 
the East with an army of 1 2,000 men to depose Sulla from command. Enjoy- 
ing undivided power at Rome, Cinna changed the Republic into a dictator- 
ship, nominated all successful candidates for major offices, and had himself 
elected consul for four successive years. 

When Flaccus left Italy, Sulla was besieging Athens, which had joined 
Mithridates in revolt. Receiving nothing from the Senate for the pay of 
his troops, he had financed his campaign by pillaging the temples and 
treasuries of Olympia, Epidaurus, and Delphi. In March, 86, his soldiers 
broke through a gate in Athens’ walls, poured in, and revenged themselves 
for the city’s long-delayed welcome by a riot of slaughter and robbery. 
Plutarch tells us that “there was no numbering the slain; . . . blood flowed 
through the streets and far out into the suburbs.” At last Sulla called a 
halt to the massacre, remarking generously that he would “forgive the living 
for the dead.” He led his refreshed troops northward, defeated a great force 
at Chaeronea and Orchomenus, pursued its remnants across the Hellespont 
into Asia, and prepared to meet the main army of the Pontic king. But 
meanwhile Flaccus and his legions had also reached Asia, and Sulla was 
again informed that he must give up his command. He persuaded Flaccus 
to let him complete the campaign; thereupon Flaccus was killed by his 
lieutenant. Fimbria, who now declared himself commander of all Roman 



CHAP.Vl) the agrarian REVOLT I25 

armies and advanced north against Sulla. Faced with this folly, Sulla made 
a peace with Mithridates (85), by which the King was to restore all the 
conquests that he had made in the war, surrender eighty galleys to Rome, 
and pay an indemnity of 2000 talents. Then Sulla turned south and met 
Fimbria in Lydia. Fimbria’s soldiers went over to Sulla, and Fimbria com- 
mitted suicide. Master now of the Greek East, Sulla exacted 20,000 talents 
as indemnities and accrued taxes from the revolted cities of Ionia. He sailed 
with his army to Greece, marched to Patrae, and arrived at Brundisium in 
83. Cinna tried to stop him but was killed by his troops. 

Sulla was bringing to the Treasury 15,000 pounds of gold and 115,000 
pounds of silver, in addition to money and works of art which he credited 
to his personal account. But the democratic leaders, still in power in Rome, 
continued to brand him as a public enemy, and denounced his treaty with 
Mithridates as a national humiliation. Reluctantly Sulla led his 40,000 
troops to the gates of Rome. Many of the aristocracy went out to join him; 
one of them, Cnaeus Pompey, brought a legion recruited entirely from his 
father’s clients and friends. The son of Marius led an army out to encounter 
Sulla, was defeated, and fled to Praeneste, after sending instructions to the 
populares praetor to put to death all leading patricians still left in the capital. 
The praetor convoked the Senate, and the marked men were killed in their 
seats or their flight. The democratic forces then evacuated Rome, and Sulla 
entered it unhindered; but meanwhile a Samnite army of 100,000 men intent 
on avenging the Social War, marched up from the south and joined the 
democratic remnants. Sulla went out to meet them, and at the Colline Gate 
his 50,000 men won one of the bloodiest victories of ancient times. Sulla 
ordered 8000 prisoners shot down with arrows, on the ground that they 
could make more trouble alive than dead. The severed heads of the captured 
generals were displayed on pikes before the walls of Praeneste, where the last 
democratic army was standing siege. Praeneste fell, the young Marius killed 
himself, and his head was nailed up in the Forum— a procedure which fre- 
quent precedents had now made constitutional. 

Sulla had no trouble in persuading the Senate to make him dictator. At 
once he issued a proscription list condemning to death forty senators and 
2600 businessmen; these last had supported Marius against him, and had 
bought in at bargains the property of senators slain during the radical regime. 
He offered rewards to informers, and prizes up to 12,000 denarii (S7200) 
to those who should bring him the proscribed men, alive or dead. The 
Forum was adorned festively with the heads of the slain and with periodi- 
cally renewed proscription lists which the citizens had to read at frequent 
inten^als to know if they might still live. Massacre, banishment, and con- 
fiscation spread their horrors from Rome to the provinces and fell upon 



126 CAESAR AND CHRIST (CHAP. VI 

Italian rebels and the followers of Marius everywhere. Some 4700 persons 
died in this aristocratic terror, “Men were butchered in the embraces of their 
wives,” says Plutarch, “sons in the arms of their mothers.” Many persons 
who had been neutral, or even conservative, were proscribed, exiled, or 
slain; Sulla, it was said, needed their money for his troops, his pleasures, or 
his friends. Confiscated property was sold to the highest bidder or to Sulla’s 
favorites, and became the foundation of many fortunes, like those of Crassus 
and Catiline. 

Using his powers as dictator, Sulla issued a series of edicts— known from 
his clan name as the Cornelian Laws— by which he hoped to establish a 
permanently aristocratic constitution. To replace dead citizens he enfran- 
chised many Spaniards and Celts and some former slaves. He weakened the 
assemblies by adding these new members indebted to him and by again 
ruhng that no measure should be put before the Assembly except by consent 
of the Senate. To stop the flocking of poor Italians to Rome he suspended 
the state distribution of com; at the same time he eased the pressure of 
population in the city by distributing land to 120,000 veterans. To prevent 
the use of successive consulships as in effect a dictatorship, he re-emphasized 
the old requirement of a ten-year interval before the same office could be 
held a second time by the same man. He lowered the prestige of the tribunate 
by limiting its right of veto and making ex-tribunes ineligible for any 
higher office. He took from the business class, and restored to the Senate, 
the exclusive right to serve as jurors in the higher courts; and he replaced 
the farming of taxes to publicans with direct payments from the provinces 
to the Treasury. He reorganized the courts, increased their number for 
quicker trials, and carefully specified their functions and fields. All the 
legislative, judicial, executive, social, and sartorial privileges enjoyed by 
the Senate before the Gracchan revolt were returned to it, for Sulla was 
certain that only a monarchy or an aristocracy could wisely administer an 
empire. To renew the full membership of the Senate he allowed the Tribal 
Assembly to promote to it 300 members of the “equestrian” class. To show 
his confidence in this thoroughgoing restoration, he disbanded his legions 
and decreed that no army should be permitted in Italy. After two years of 
dictatorship, he resigned all his powers, re-established consular government, 
and retired to private life (80), 

He was safe, for he had killed nearly all who could plan his assassination. 
He dismissed his lictors and guards, walked unharmed in the Forum, and 
offered to give an account of his official actions to any citizen who should 
ask for it. Then he went to spend his last years in his villa at Cumae. Tired 
of war, of power and glory, perhaps of men, he surrounded himself with 
singers, dancers, actors, and actresses; wrote his Connnentarii, hunted and 



CHAP. Vl) THE AGRARIAN REVOLT 127 

fished, ate and drank. Men had long since called him Sulla Felix, Sulla the 
Happy, because he had won every battle, known every pleasure, reached 
every power, and lived without fear or regret. He married five wives, di- 
vorced four, and eked out their inadequacy with mistresses. At 58 he devel- 
oped an ulcer of the colon so severe that “the corrupted flesh,” says Plutarch, 
“broke out into lice. Many men were employed day and night in destroying 
them, but they so multiplied that not only his clothes, baths, and basins, but 
his very food was polluted with them.” He died of intestinal hemorrhage, 
after hardly a year of retirement (78). He had not neglected to dictate his 
epitaph: “No friend ever served me, and no enemy ever wronged me, whom 
I have not repaid in full.” 



CHAPTER VII 


The Oligarchic Reaction 

77-60 B.C. 


I. THE GOVERNMENT 

N evertheless, Sulla had erred twice on the side of generosity. 
He had spared the son and nephew of his enemies, the gay and brilliant 
Caius Julius Caesar, who was entering his twenties in the proscription years; 
Sulla had nominated him for death, but let him go on the importuning of 
their common friends; his judgment, however, was not mistaken when he 
remarked, “In that young man go many Mariuses.” ^ And perhaps he erred 
in resigning too soon and enjoying himself to an early end. Had his patience 
and insight equaled his ruthlessness and courage, he might have saved Rome 
a half century of chaos and given her in 80 b.c. the peace and security, order 
and prosperity, that Augustus would bring back from Actium. He restored 
the old when he should have created the new. 

Within a decade after his death his work was in ruins. Relaxed in the 
arms of victory, the patricians neglected the tasks of government to seek 
wealth in business and spend it in luxury. The struggle between the opti- 
ntates and the popular es continued with a bitterness that passionately awaited 
another opportunity for violence. The opthmtes, or “best people,” made 
nobilitas their creed; not in the sense of fioblesse oblige, but on the theory 
that good government required the restriction of major magistracies to men 
whose ancestors had held high office. Anyone who ran for office without 
such forebears was scorned as novus homo— 2. “new man,” or upstart; such 
were Marius and Qcero. The populares demanded “career open to talent,” 
all power to the assemblies, and free land for veterans and the poor. Neither 
party believed in democracy; both aspired to dictatorship, and both prac- 
ticed intimidation and corruption without conscience or concealment. The 
collegia that had once been mutual-benefit societies became agencies for the 
sale of great blocks of plebeian votes. The business of vote buying reached 
a scale where it required a high specialization of labor; there were divisores, 
who bought votes, interpretes, or go-betweens, and sequestres, who held 
the money until the votes had been delivered.^ Cicero describes candidates as 
going about purse in hand among the electors in the Eield of Mars.® Pompey 

128 



THE OLIGARCHIC REACTION 


129 


CHAP. VIl) 

had his mediocre friend Afranius made consul by inviting the leaders of the 
tribes to his gardens and there paying them for the ballots of their groups.^ 
So much money was borrowed to finance candidacies that the campaigns 
raised the interest rate to eight per cent per month.® 

The courts, now pre-empted by senators, rivaled the polls in corruption. 
Oaths had lost all value as testimony; perjury was as common as bribery. 
Marcus Messala, being indicted for buying his election to the consulate (53), 
was unanimously acquitted, though even his friends acknowledged his 
guilt.® “Trials are now managed so venally,” wrote Cicero to his son, “that 
no man will ever be condemned hereafter except for murder.” He should 
have said “no man of means”; for “without money and a good lawyer,” said 
another advocate at this period, “a plain, simple defendant may be accused 
of any crime which he has not committed, and will certainly be convicted.” ® 
Lentulus Sura, having been acquitted by two votes, mourned the extra 
expense he had gone to in bribing one more judge than he had needed.® When 
Quintus Calidus, praetor, was convicted by a jury of senators, he calculated 
that “they could not honestly require less than 300,000 sesterces to condemn 
a praetor.” 

Protected by such courts, the Senatorial proconsuls, the tax gatherers, the 
moneylenders, and the business agents milked the provinces at a rate that 
would have angered their predecessors with envy. There v^ere several hon- 
orable and competent provincial governors, but what could be expected of 
the majority.!’ They served without pay, usually for a year’s term; in that 
brief time they had to accumulate enough to pay their debts, buy another 
office, and set themselves up for life in the style befitting a great Roman. The 
sole check upon their venality was the Senate; and the senators could be 
trusted as gentlemen not to raise a fuss, since nearly all of them had done, 
or hoped soon to do, the same. When Caesar went to Farther Spain as pro- 
consul in 61 he owed $7,500,000; when he returned in 60 he cleared off 
these debts at one stroke. Cicero thought himself a painfully honest man; 
he made only $i 10,000 in his year as governor of Cilicia and filled his letters 
with wonder at his own moderation. 

The generals who conquered the provinces were the first to profit from 
them. Lucullus, after his campaigns in the East, became a synonym for 
luxury. Pompey brought in from the same region $ 1 1,200,000 for the Treas- 
ury and $2 1,000,000 for himself and his friends; Caesar took literally untold 
milHons from Gaul. After the generals came the publicans, who collected 
from the people twice the amount which they remitted to Rome. WTen a 
province or city could not raise enough from its subjects to pay the de- 
manded tribute or tax, Roman financiers or statesmen would lend them the 
necesssary funds at from twelve to forty-eight per cent interest, to be col- 



130 


CAESAR AND CHRIST 


(chap. VII 

lected, if need be, by the Roman army through siege, conquest, and pillage. 
The Senate had forbidden its members to take part in such loans, but pomp- 
ous aristocrats like Pompey, and saints hke Brutus, skirted the law by lend- 
ing through intermediaries. In some years the province of Asia paid Romans 
twice as much in interest on loans as it paid to the pubhcans and the Treas- 
ury.^^ The paid and unpaid interest on money borrowed by the cities of 
Asia Minor to meet Sulla’s exactions in 84 had swelled by 70 to six times the 
principal. To meet the charges on this debt communities sold their public 
buildings and statuary, and parents sold their children into slavery, for 
defaulting debtors could be stretched on the rack.^^ If any wealth still 
remained, a flock of entrepreneurs came in from Italy, Syria, and Greece, 
with Senatorial contracts for “developing” the mineral, timber, or other 
resources of the province; trade followed the flag. Some bought slaves, 
some sold or bought goods, others purchased land and set up provincial 
latifundia larger than those of Italy. “No Gaul,” said Cicero in 69, with his 
customary exaggeration, “carries through any business without the inter- 
vention of a Roman citizen; not a penny changes hands there without passing 
through the ledgers of a Roman.” 

Antiquity had never known so rich, so powerful, and so corrupt a 
government. 


II. THE MILLIONAIRES 

The business classes reconciled themselves to the rule of the Senate because 
they were better prepared than the aristocracy to exploit the provinces. That 
“concord of the orders,” or co-operation of the two upper classes, which 
Cicero was to preach as an ideal, was already a reality in his youth; they had 
agreed to unite and conquer. Businessmen and their aggressive agents 
crowded the basilicas and streets of Rome and swarmed into provincial 
markets and capitals. Bankers issued letters of exchange on their provincial 
affiliates,^® and lent money for everything, even political careers. Merchants 
and financiers swung their influence to the populares when the Senate proved 
selfish, and back to the optifnates when democratic leaders tried to keep their 
pre-election promises to the proletariat. 

Crassus, Atticus, and Lucullus typify the three phases of Roman wealth: 
acquisition, speculation, luxury. Marcus Licinius Crassus was of aristocratic 
lineage. His father, a famous orator, consul, and censor, had fought for Sulla 
and had killed himself rather than yield to Marius. Sulla rewarded the son 
by letting him buy at bargain prices the confiscated properties of proscribed 
men. As a youth Marcus had studied literature and philosophy and had 
assiduously practiced law; but now the smell of money intoxicated him. He 



CHAP.VIl) THE OLIGARCHIC REACTION I31 

organized a fire brigade— something new to Rome; it ran to fires, sold its 
services on the spot, or bought endangered buildings at nominal sums and 
then put out the fire; in this way Crassus acquired hundreds of houses and 
tenements, which he let at high rentals. He bought state mines when Sulla 
denationalized them. Soon he had inflated his fortune from 7,000,000 to 
170,000,000 sesterces ($25,500,000)— a sum nearly equal to the total yearly 
revenue of the Treasury. No man should consider himself rich, said Crassus, 
unless he could raise, equip, and maintain his own army; it was his destiny 
to perish by his definition. Having become the wealthiest man in Rome, he 
was stUl unhappy; he itched for pubhc office, for a province, for the leader- 
ship of an Asiatic campaign. He sohcited votes humbly in the streets, memo- 
rized the first names of countless citizens, lived in conspicuous simplicity, 
and, to tether influential pohticians to his star, lent them money without 
interest but payable on demand. With all his eager ambitions he was a kindly 
man, accessible to everyone, generous without limit to his friends, and con- 
tributing to both pohtical parties with that bilateral wisdom which has al- 
ways distinguished his kind. He fulfilled all his dreams: he became consul 
in 70 and again in 55, governed Syria, and helped to raise the great army 
that he led against Parthia. He was defeated at Carrhae, treacherously cap- 
tured, and barbarously slain (53 ) ; his head was cut off, and into the mouth 
his conqueror poured molten gold. 

Titus Pomponius Atticus, though of equestrian birth, was a truer aristo- 
crat than Crassus and a higher type of millionaire: as honest as Meyer Anschel 
of the rot Schild, as learned as Lorenzo de’ Aledici, as financially astute as 
Voltaire. We hear of him first as a student in Athens, when his conversation, 
and his reading of Greek and Latin poetry, so charmed Sulla that the blood- 
stained commander wished, in vain, to take him back to Rome as a personal 
companion. He was a scholar and a historian, wrote an outhne of universal 
history,^® lived most of his life in the philosophical circles of Athens, and 
earned his cognomen from his Attic erudition and philanthropies. His father 
and his uncle left him some $960,000; he invested it in a great cattle ranch 
in Epirus, in buying and letting houses in Rome, in training gladiators and 
secretaries and hiring them out, and in publishing books. When good open- 
ings came he lent money at profitable rates; but to Athens and his friends 
he lent without interest.^® Men like Cicero, Hortensius, and the younger 
Cato entrusted him Avith their savings and the management of their affairs, 
and honored him for his caution, his integrity, and his dividends. Cicero was 
glad to have his advice not only in purchasing houses, but in choosing statu- 
ary to adoni them and books to fill his library. Atticus entertained frugally 
and hved with the modesty of a true Epicurean; but his genial friendship and 
his cultivated conversation made his house in Rome the salon of all political 



132 CAESAR AND CHRIST (cHAP. VII 

celebrities. He contributed to all parties and was spared in all proscriptions. 
At the age of seventy-seven, finding himself afflicted with a painful and 
incurable disease, he starved himself to death. 

Lucius Licinius Lucullus, of high patrician family, sallied forth in 74 to 
complete Sulla’s war against Mithridates. For eight years he led his inade- 
quate forces with courage and skill; then, as his campaign was nearing full 
success, his tired troops mutinied, and he guided their retreat from Armenia 
to Ionia through perils as great as those that had immortalized Xenophon. 
Relieved of his command by political intrigue, he returned to Rome and, 
with his patrimony and his spoils, spent the rest of his life in quiet but ornate 
luxury. He built on the Pincian hill a palace with spacious halls, loggias, 
libraries, and gardens; at Tusculum his estate extended for many miles; he 
bought a villa at Misenum for 10,000,000 sesterces ($1,500,000); and he 
turned the entire island of Nisida into his summer resort. His various gar- 
dens were famous for their horticultural innovations; it was he, for exafnple, 
who introduced the cherry tree from Pontus to Italy, whence it was carried 
to north Europe and America. His dinners were the culinary events of the 
Roman year. Cicero tried once to find out how Lucullus ate when alone; 
he asked Lucullus to invite him and some friends to dinner that evening, 
but pledged Lucullus to send no word of warning to his servants. Lucullus 
agreed, merely stipulating that he be allowed to notify his staff that he would 
eat in the “Apollo Room” that evening. When Cicero and the rest came 
they found a lavish repast. Lucullus had several dining rooms in his city 
palace, each selected according to the splendor of the feast; the Apollo Room 
was reserved for meals costing 200,000 sesterces or more.^’ But Lucullus was 
no gourmand. His houses were galleries of well-chosen art; his hbraries were 
the resort of scholars and his friends; he himself was learned in both the 
classical literatures and in all the philosophies— naturally favoring that of 
Epicurus. He smiled at Pompey’s strenuous life; one campaign seemed to 
him enough for one life; anything more was mere vanity. 

His example spread without his taste among the rich of Rome; soon patri- 
cians and magnates were competing in luxurious display, while revolt brewed 
in bankrupt provinces and men starved in the slums. Senators lounged in 
bed till noon and seldom attended sessions. Some of their sons dressed and 
walked like courtesans, wore frilled robes and women’s sandals, decked 
themselves with jewelry, sprinkled themselves with perfume, deferred mar- 
riage or avoided p'^rentage, and emulated the bisexual impartiality of the 
Greeks. Senatorial houses cost up to 10,000,000 sesterces; Clodius, leader of 
the plebs, built a mansion costing 14,800,000. Lawyers like Cicero and Hor- 
tensius, despite the Cincian law against legal fees, competed in palaces as 
well as in oratory ; the gardens of Hortensius contained the largest zoologi- 



CHAP.VIl) THE OLIGARCHIC REACTION I33 

cal collection in Italy. All men of any pretension had villas at or near Baiae, 
where the aristocracy took the baths, enjoyed the Bay of Naples, and de- 
clared a moratorium on monogamy. Other villas rose on the hills outside of 
Rome; rich men had several, moving from one to another as the season 
changed. Fortunes were spent on interior decoration, furniture, or silver 
plate. Cicero paid 500,000 sesterces for a table of citrus wood; a million ses- 
terces might be paid for one of cypress wood; even the younger Cato, pillar 
of all Stoic virtues, was alleged to have paid 800,000 sesterces for some table 
spreads from Babylon.^® 

A horde of specialized slaves formed the staff of these palaces— valets, 
letter carriers, lamplighters, musicians, secretaries, doctors, philosophers, 
cooks. Eating was now the chief occupation of upper-class Rome; there, as 
in the ethics of Metrodorus, “everything good had reference to the belly.” 
At a repast given in 63 by a high priest, and attended incongruously by 
Vestal Virgins and Caesar, the hors d’oeuvres consisted of mussels, spondyles, 
fieldfares Avith asparagus, fattened fowls, oyster pastries, sea nettles, ribs of 
roe, purple shellfish, and songbirds. Then came the dinner— sows’ udders, 
boar’s head, fish, duck, teals, hares, fowl, pastries, and sweets.^® Delicacies 
were imported from every part of the Empire and beyond: peacocks from 
Samos, grouse from Phrygia, cranes from Ionia, tunnyfish from Chalcedon, 
muraenas from Gades, oysters from Tarentum, sturgeons from Rhodes. 
Foods produced in Italy were considered a bit vulgar, fit only for plebeians. 
The actor Aesopus gave a dinner at which songbirds were eaten to the cost 
of $5000.^ Sumptuary laws continued to denounce expensive meals, and to 
be ignored. Cicero tried to obey, ate the legally permitted vegetables, and 
suffered ten days of diarrhea."^ 

Some of the new wealth disported itself in enlarged theaters and extended 
games. In 58 Aemilius Scaurus built a theater with 8000 seats, 360 pillars, 
3000 statues, a three-storied stage, and three colonnades— one of wood, one 
of marble, and one of glass; his slaves, rebelling against the hard labor he had 
exacted of them, burned down the theater soon afterward, netting him a loss 
of 100,000,000 sesterces.^® fri 55 Pompey provided funds for the first perma- 
nent stone theater in Rome— with 17,500 seats, and a spacious porticoed park 
for entr’acte promenades. In 53 Scribonius Curio, one of Caesar’s generals, 
erected two wooden theaters, each a semicircle, back to back; in the morning 
the two stages presented plays; then, while the spectators were still in their 
seats, the two structures were turned on pivots and wheels, the semicircles 
formed an amphitheater and the united stages became an arena for gladia- 
torial games."^ Never had such games been so frequent, costly, or prolonged. 
In a single day of the games given by Caesar 10,000 gladiators took part, 



CAESAR AND CHRIST 


134 


(chap. VII 


many of whom were killed. Sulla exhibited a fight involving a hundred lions, 
Caesar four hundred, Pompey six hundred. Beasts fought men, men fought 
men; and the vast audience waited hopefully for the sight of death. 


III. THE NEW WOMAN 

The increase of wealth conspired with the corruption of politics to loosen 
morals and the marriage bond. Despite increasing competition from women 
and men, prostitution continued to flourish; brothels and the taverns that 
usually housed them were so popular that some politicians organized votes 
through the collegium lupanariorum, or guild of brothelkeepers.“® Adultery 
was so common as to attract little attention unless played up for political 
purposes, and practically every well-to-do woman had at least one divorce. 
This was not the fault of women; it resulted largely from the subordination 
of marriage, in the upper classes, to money and politics. Men chose wives, or 
youths had wives chosen for them, to get a rich dowry or make advantageous 
connections. Sulla and Pompey married five times. Seeking to attach Pompey 
to him, Sulla persuaded him to put away his first wife and marry Aemllia, 
SuHa’s stepdaughter, who was already married and with child; Aemilia reluc- 
tantly agreed, but died in childbirth shortly after entering Pompey’s house. 
Caesar gave his daughter Julia to Pompey in marriage as an item in their 
triumviral alliance. The Empire, growled Cato, had become a matrimonial 
agency Such unions were Tmriages de politique; as soon as their utility 
ended, the husband looked for another wife as a steppingstone to higher 
place or greater wealth. He did not need to give a reason; he merely sent his 
wife a letter announcing her freedom and his. Some men did not marry at 
all, alleging distaste for the forwardness and extravagance of the new woman; 
many lived in free unions with concubines or slaves. The censor Metellus 
Macedonicus ( 1 3 1 ) had begged men to marry and beget children as a duty 
to the state, however much of a nuisance {molestia) a wife might be; but 
the number of celibates and childless couples increased more rapidly after 
he spoke. Children were now luxuries which only the poor could afford. 

Under these circumstances women could hardly be blamed for looking 
lightly upon their marriage vows and seeking in liaisons the romance or 
affection that political matrimony had failed to bring. There was, of course, 
a majority of good women, even among the rich; but a new freedom was 
breaking down the old patria potestas and the ancient family discipline. 
Roman women now moved about almost as freely as men. They dressed in 
diaphanous silks from India and China, and ransacked Asia for perfumes 
and jewelry. Marriage cum mami disappeared, and women divorced their 



THE OLIGARCHIC REACTION 


135 


CHAP. VIl) 

husbands as readily as men their wives. A growing proportion of women 
sought expression in cultural pursuits: they learned Greek, studied philoso- 
phy, wrote poetry, gave public lectures, played, sang, and danced, and 
opened literaiy salons; some engaged in business; a few practiced medicine 
or law. 

Clodia, the wife of Quintus CaeciHus AHetellus, was the most prominent 
of those ladies who in this period supplemented their husbands with a suc- 
cession of cavalieri serventi. She had a gay passion for the rights of women; 
shocked the older generation by going about unchaperoned with her male 
friends after her marriage; accosted people whom she met and knew, and 
sometimes publicly kissed them, instead of lowering her eyes and crouching 
in her carriage as proper women were supposed to do. She invited her male 
friends to dine with her while her husband absented himself with the chiv- 
alry of the Marquis du Chatelet. Cicero, who cannot be trusted, describes 
“her loves, adulteries, and lecheries, her songs and symphonies, her suppers 
and carousing, at Baiae on land and sea.” She was a clever woman, who 
could sin with irresistible grace, but she underestimated the selfishness of 
men. Each lover demanded her entirely until his appetite waned, and each 
became her shocked enemy when she found a new friend. So Catullus (if she 
was his Lesbia) besmeared her with ribald epigrams; and Caelius, alluding to 
the price paid for the poorest prostitutes, called her in open court the 
quadrantana—t)\t quarter-of-an-as (one-and-a-half-cent) woman. She had 
accused him of trying to poison her; he hired Cicero to defend him; and the 
great orator did not hesitate to charge her with incest and murder, protest- 
ing, however, that he was “not the enemy of women, still less of one who 
was the friend of all men.” Caelius was acquitted, and Clodia paid some 
penalty for being the sister of that Publius Clodius who was the most radical 
leader in Rome and Cicero’s implacable enemy. 


IV. ANOTHER CATO 

Amid all this corruption and laxity one man stood out as an exemplar and 
professor of the ancient ways. Marcus Porcius Cato the Younger had vio- 
lated a precept of his great-great-grandfather by studying Greek; from it 
he derived that Stoic philosophy which shared with his repubhcan convic- 
tions the inflexible devotion of his life. He inherited 120 t_lents ($432,000), 
but lived in sedulous simplicity. He lent money, but took no interest. He 
lacked his ancestor’s rough humor, and frightened people by what seemed 
to them his obstinate incorruptibility and his untimely addiction to princi- 
ples. His fife was an unforgivable indictment of theirs; they wished he would 



CAESAR AND CHRIST 


136 


(chap. VII 


sin a little, if only out of a decent respect for the habits of mankind. They 
must have rejoiced when, with an almost Cynical conception of woman as a 
biological instrument, he “lent” his wife Marcia to his friend Hortensius— 
i.e., divorced her and assisted at her marriage to the orator— and later, when 
Hortensius died, took her again to wife."* He could not be popular, for he 
was the relentless enemy of all dishonesty, the stem defender of the patria 
potestas, a more merciless censor inoralium than Cato Censor himself. He 
seldom laughed or smiled, made no effort to be affable, and sharply repri- 
manded any who dared to flatter him. He was defeated for the consulship, 
said Cicero, because he acted like a citizen in Plato’s repubhc instead of a 
Roman living among “the dregs of Romulus’ posterity.” ^ 

As quaestor Cato made himself a terror to all incompetence and malfeas- 
ance, and guarded the Treasury ferociously from all political raids; nor did 
his watchfulness abate when his term expired. His indictments fell upon all 
parties and left him with a thousand admirers but hardly a friend. As praetor 
he persuaded the Senate to issue an order that all candidates, scon after 
election, must come into court and give under oath a detailed account of 
their expenses and proceedings in the campaign. The measure disturbed so 
many politicians, most of whom depended upon bribery, that they and their 
clients, when Cato next appeared in the Forum, reviled and stoned him; 
whereupon he climbed to the rostrum, faced the crowd resolutely, and 
talked them into submission. As tribune he led a legion into Macedonia; his 
attendants rode on horseback, he went on foot. He scorned the business 
classes and defended aristocracy, or rule by birth, as the only alternative to 
plutocracy, or rule by wealth. He warred without truce upon the men who 
were corrupting Roman politics with money, and Roman character with 
luxury; and he stood out to the last against every move, by either Pompey 
or Caesar, toward dictatorship. When Caesar had overthrown the Republic 
Cato died by his own hand, with a volume of philosophy by his side. 


V. SPARTACUS 

Misgovernment now reached a height, and democracy a depth, rare in the 
history of states. In 98 b.c. the Roman general Didius repeated the exploit of 
Sulpicius Galba: he lured a whole tribe of troublesome natives into a Roman 
camp in Spain by pretending to register them for a distribution of land; when 
they had entered, with their wives and children, he had them all slaughtered. 
On his return to Rome he was awarded a public triumph.*® Shocked bv the 
brutalities of empire, a Sabine officer in the Roman army, Quintus Sertorius, 
went over to the Spaniards, organized and drilled them, and led them to victory 



THE OLIGARCHIC REACTION 


137 


CHAP. VIl) 

after victory over the legions sent to subdue him. For eight years (80-72) he 
ruled a rebel kingdom, winning the affection of the people by his just administra- 
tion and by his establishment of schools for the education of native youth. 
Metellus, the Roman general, offered a hundred talents ($360,000) and 20,000 
acres of land to any Roman who should kill him. Perpenna, a Roman refugee in 
Sertorius’ camp, invited him to dinner, assassinated him, and made himself 
master of the army that Sertorius had trained. Pompey was sent against Perpenna 
and easily defeated him; Perpenna was executed, and the exploitation of Spain 
was resumed. • 

The next act of the revolution came not from the free but from the slave. 
Lentulus Batiates kept at Capua a school of gladiators— slaves or condemned 
criminals trained to fight animals, or one another, to the death in public 
arenas or private homes. Two hundred of them tried to escape; seventy-eight 
succeeded, armed themselves, occupied a slope of V esuvius, and raided the 
adjoining towns for food (73). -A.s their leader they chose a Thracian, 
Spartacus, “a man not only of high spirit and bravery,” says Plutarch, “but 
also in understanding and gentleness superior to his condition.” He issued 
a call to the slaves of Italy to rise in revolt; soon he had 70,000 men, hunger- 
ing for liberty and revenge. He taught them to manufacture their own 
weapons, and to fight with such order and discipline that for years they 
outmatched every force sent to subdue them. His victories filled the rich 
men of Italy with fear, and its slaves with hope; so many of these tried to 
join him that after raising his army to 120,000 he refused further recruits, 
finding it difficult to care for them. He marched his horde toward the Alps, 
“intending, when he had passed them, that every man should go to his own 
home.” But his followers did not share these refined and pacific sentiments; 
revolting against his leadership, they began to loot the towns of northern 
Italy. The Senate now sent both consuls, with heavy forces, against the 
rebels. One army met a detachment that had seceded from Spartacus, and 
slaughtered it; the other attacked the main rebel body, and was defeated. 
Moving again toward the Alps, Spartacus encountered a third army, led by 
Cassius, and decimated it; but finding his way blocked by still other legions, 
he turned south and marched toward Rome. 

Half the slaves of Italy were on the verge of insurrection, and in the capi- 
tal no man could tell when the revolution would break out in his very home. 
All that opulent society, which had enjoyed every luxury slavery could 
produce, trembled at the thought of losing everything— mastery, property, 
fife. Senators and millionaires cried out for a better general; few offered 
themselves, for all feared this strange new foe. At last Crassus came forward 
and was given the command, with 40,000 men; and many of the nobility. 



CAESAR AND CHRIST 


138 


(chap. VII 


not all forgetting the traditions of their class, joined him as volunteers. 
Knowing that he had an empire against him, and that his men coiild never 
administer either the Empire or the capital, Spartacus passed Rome by and 
continued south to Thurii, marching the length of Italy in the hope of trans- 
porting his men to Sicily or Africa. For a third year he fought off all attacks. 
But again his impatient soldiers rejected his authority and began to ravage 
the neighboring towns. Crassus came upon a horde of these marauders and 
slew them, 12,300 in number, every man fighting to the last. Meanwhile 
Pompey’s legions, returning from Spain, were sent to swell the forces of 
Crassus. Despairing of victory over such a multitude, Spartacus flung him- 
self upon the army of Crassus and welcomed death by plunging into the 
midst of the foe. Two centurions fell by his hand; struck down and unable 
to rise, he continued the fight on his knees; at last he was so cut to pieces 
that his body could not later be identified. The great majority of his fol- 
lowers perished with him; some fled, and became hunted men in the woods 
of Italy; 6000 captives were crucified along the Appian Way from Capua to 
Rome (71)- There their rotting bodies were left to hang for months, so that 
all masters might take comfort, and all slaves take heed. 


VI. POMPEY 

When Crassus and Pompey returned from this campaign they did not, 
as the Senate wished and law required, disband or disarm their troops at the 
gates. Camping outside the walls, they asked permission to stand for the 
consulate without entering the city— again a violation of precedent; in addi- 
tion Pompey demanded land for his soldiers and a triumph for himself. The 
Senate refused, hoping to play one general against the other. But Crassus and 
Pompey joined hands, made a sudden alliance with the populares and the 
business class, and by generous bribery won election as consuls for 70 b.c. 
The magnates entered the partnership for two immediate ends: to recapture 
power in the juries that tried them, and to replace Lucullus— who had ruled 
the Roman East with unprofitable integrity— by a man of their own class 
and views. In Pompey they recognized their man. 

Pompey was now thirty-five, and already the veteran of many campaigns. 
Bom of a rich equestrian family, he had won universal admiration by his 
courage and temperance, and his skill in every branch of sport and war. He 
had cleared Sicily and Africa of Sulla’s enemies, and by his victories and his 
pride had earned from the humorous dictator the cognomen Magnus, the 
Great. He had achieved a triumph almost before a beard.®® He was so hand- 
some that the courtesan Flora declared she could never part from him with- 



CHAP. VIl) THE OLIGARCHIC REACTION 1 39 

out a bite.®^ He was sensitive and shy, and blushed when he had to address 
a public gathering, but in battle he was in these days impetuously brave; in 
later life timidity and corpulence burdened his generalship, and he hesitated 
fill lost. His mind had neither brilliance nor depth; his policies were made 
for him, not by him— first by the politicians of the populares, then by the 
Senatorial oligarchy. His great wealth lifted him above the coarser tempta- 
tions of politics; amid the selfishness and corruption of his time he shone by 
his patriotism and his integrity; he seems to have sincerely sought the public 
good as well as his own. His outstanding fault was vanity. His early successes 
led him to overrate his abilities, and he wondered why Rome waited so long 
to make him in everything but name a king. 

The two favorites of Sulla, now consuls together, devoted themselves to 
overthrowing the Sudan constitution. Pompey and Crassus paid their debt 
to the populares by passing a bill that restored all the power of the tribunes. 
They consolidated their alliance with business by directing Lucullus to give 
the publicans full charge of tax collections in the East; and they supported 
legislation that required juries to be drawn equally from the Senate, the 
equestrian class, and the tribunes of the Treasury. Crassus had to wait fifteen 
years for his reward— the privilege of drinking gold in Asia; Pompey received 
his in 67, when the Assembly voted him almost limitless authority to proceed 
against the pirates of Cilicia. Once Rhodes had kept the Aegean free of such 
marauders; but Rhodes, humiliated and impoverished by Rome and Delos, 
could no longer maintain the fleet required for such a service; and the landed 
aristocracy that controlled the Senate had no keen interest in making the 
channels of maritime commerce secure. Merchants and plebs felt the results 
more sharply; trade became almost impossible in the Aegean, even in the 
central Mediterranean; and imports of grain fell so rapidly that the price of 
wheat at Rome rose to twenty sesterces per modius, or three dollars a peck. 
The pirates flaunted their success with gilded masts, purple sails, and silver- 
plated oars on their thousand ships; they took and held 400 coastal towns, 
plundered temples in Samothrace, Samos, Epidaurus, Argos, Leucas, and 
Actium, kidnaped Roman officials, and assailed even the shores of Apulia 
and Etruria. 

To meet this situation Pompey’s friend Gabinius proposed a bill giving 
him for three years absolute control of all Roman fleets, and all persons 
within fifty miles of any Mediterranean shore. Every senator but Caesar 
opposed this extraordinary measure, but the Assembly passed it with enthusi- 
asm, voted Pompey an army of 125,000 men and a navy of 500 vessels, and 
ordered the Treasury to place 144,000,000 sesterces at his disposal. In effect 
the bill deposed the Senate, ended the Sullan restoration, and established a 
provisional monarchy as a prelude and lesson to Caesar. The outcome 



140 


CAESAR AND CHRIST 


(chap. VII 

Strengthened the precedent. The very day after Pompey’s appointment the 
price of wheat began to fall. Within three months he accomplished his task- 
captured the pirate ships, took their strongholds, executed their leaders— and 
yet without abusing his unusual authority. Commerce took heart and sailed 
again, and a river of cereals flowed into Rome. 

While Pompey was still in Cilicia, his friend Marulius offered the Assem- 
bly a bill transferring to him full command of the armies and provinces then 
(66) under Lucullus, and prolonging the powers conferred upon him by 
the Gabinian Law. The Senate resisted, but the merchants and moneylenders 
gave strong support to the proposal. Pompey, they hoped, would be less 
lenient than Lucullus to their Asiatic debtors; he would restore the tax col- 
lections to the publicans; he would conquer not only Bithynia and Pontus, 
but Cappadocia, Syria, and Judea; and these rich fields would be thrown 
open to Roman trade and finance under the protection of Roman arms. 
A “new man,” Marcus Tullius Cicero, who had been elected praetor for 
that year with the aid of the business class, spoke “For the Manilian Law,” 
and attacked the Senatorial oligarchy with a rash eloquence unheard in 
Rome since the Gracchi, and with a candor shocking in a politician: 

The whole system of credit and finance which is carried on here at 
Rome is inextricably bound up with the revenues of the Asiatic prov- 
inces. If these revenues are destroyed, our system of credit will 
crash. ... If some lose their entire fortunes they will drag many 
more down with them. Save the state from such a calamity. . . . 
Prosecute with all your energies the war against Mithridates, by 
which the glory of the Roman name, the safety of our allies, our 
most valuable revenues, and the fortunes of innumerable citizens 
will be effectively preserved.®® 

The measure was readily passed by the Assembly. The plebs cared little for 
the fortunes of the financiers; but it rejoiced in having found, through the 
issuance of extraordinary powers to a general, a means of annulling the 
SuUan legislation and deposing its ancient enemy, the Senate. From that 
moment the days of the Republic were numbered. The Roman revolution, 
helped by the oratory of its greatest foe, had taken another step toward 
Caesar. 


VII. CICERO AND CATILINE 

Plutarch thought that Marcus Tullius was called Cicero because of a wart, 
shaped like a vetch {cicer), on an ancestor’s nose; more probably his fore- 
bears had earned the cognomen by raising renowned crops of chick-peas. 



CHAP. VIl) THE OLIGARCHIC REACTION 14I 

In his Laws Cicero describes with engaging tenderness the modest villa that 
had seen his birth near Arpinum, halfway between Rome and Naples, in the 
foothills of the Apennines. His father was just rich enough to give his son the 
best education that the age could provide. He engaged the Greek poet 
Archias to tutor Marcus in literature and Greek and then sent the youth 
to study law with Q. Mucius Scaevola, the greatest jurist of his time. Cicero 
listened eagerly to the trials and debates in the Forum, and rapidly learned 
the arts and tricks of forensic speech. “To succeed in the law,” he said, “a 
man must renounce all pleasures, avoid all amusements, say farewell to recrea- 
tion, games, entertainment, almost to intercourse with his friends.” 

Soon he was practicing law himself and making speeches whose brilliance 
and courage won him the gratitude of the middle classes and the plebs. He 
prosecuted a favorite of Sulla and denounced the proscriptions in the midst 
of the Sullan terror (80 b.c.).^^ Shortly afterward, perhaps to avoid the dic- 
tator’s revenge, he went to Greece, and continued there his studies of oratory 
and philosophy. After three happy years in Athens he passed over to Rhodes, 
where he heard the lectures of Apollonius, son of Molon, on rhetoric, and 
those of Poseidonius on philosophy. From the first he learned the periodic 
sentence structure and purity of speech that were to distinguish his style; 
and from the other that mild Stoicism which he would later expound in his 
essays on religion, government, friendship, and old age. 

Returning to Rome at the age of thirty, he married Terentia, whose ample 
dowry now enabled him to go into politics. In 75 he distinguished himself 
by his just administration of a quaestorship in Sicily. In 70, having resumed 
the practice of law, he raised a furor among the aristocracy by accepting 
a retainer from the cities of Sicily and bringing suit against the senator Gains 
Verres, on the charge that as propraetor there (73-71) Verres had sold his 
appointments and decisions, had lowered individual tax assessments in inverse 
proportion to bribes received, had despoiled Syracuse of nearly all its statu- 
arjL had assigned the revenues of a whole city to his mistress, and all in all 
had carried injustice, extortion, and robbery to such a pitch as to leave the 
island more desolate than after two Servile Wars. Worse yet, Verres had 
kept for himself some of the spoils that usually went to the publicans. The 
business class supported Cicero in the indictment, while Hortensius, aristo- 
cratic leader of the Roman bar, led the defense for Verres. Cicero was al- 
lowed some hundred days to gather evidence in Sicily; he took only fifty, 
but he presented so much damaging testimony in his opening address that 
Hortensius— who had decorated his gardens with part of Verres’ sculptural 
loot— abandoned his client. Condemned to pay a fine of 40,000,000 sesterces, 
Verres fled into exile. Cicero published the five additional speeches that he 



142 CAESAR AND CHRIST ( CHAP. VII 

had prepared; they constituted an unsparing attack upon Roman malfeasance 
in the provinces. His energy and courage won him such support that when 
he ran for the consulate for 63 b.c. he was elected by acclamation. 

Bom of modest equestrian rank, Cicero had naturally sided with the middle 
class and had resented the pride, privileges, and misrale of the aristocracy. 
But far more deeply he feared those radical leaders whose program, he 
thought, threatened all property with mob mle. He therefore made it his 
policy, now that he was in office, to promote a “concord of the orders”— 
i.e., a co-operation of the aristocracy and the business class— against the 
returning tide of revolt. 

The causes and forces of discontent, however, were too deep and varied 
to be easily dissolved. Many of the poor were listening to preachers of 
utopia, and some who listened were ripe for violence. A little above them 
were plebeians who had forfeited their property through defaulted mort- 
gages. Some of Sulla’s veterans had failed to make their land allotments pay 
and were ready for any disturbance that might give them loot without toU. 
Among the upper classes were insolvent debtors and ruined speculators who 
had lost all hope or wish to meet their obligations. Others had pohtical ambi- 
tions and saw their road to advancement cluttered with conservatives who 
took too long to die. A few revolutionists were sincere idealists, convinced 
that only a complete overturn could mitigate the corruption and inequity 
of the Roman state. 

One man sought to unite these scattered groups into a coherent political 
force. We know Lucius Sergius Catiline only through his enemies— through 
the history of his movement by the millionaire Sallust, and through the 
violent vituperation of Cicero’s orations Against Catiline. Sallust describes 
him as a “guilt-stained soul at odds with gods and men, who found no rest 
either waking or sleeping, so cruelly did conscience ravage his overwrought 
mind. Hence his pallid complexion, his bloodshot eyes, his gait now fast 
now slow; in short, his face and every glance showed the madman.” Such 
a description suggests the pictures that a people struggling for life or power 
paints of its enemies in war; when the battle is over the pictures are gradu- 
ally revised, but in the case of Catiline we have no revision. In youth he had 
been charged with deflowering a Vestal Virgin, a half sister of Cicero’s first 
wife; the court had acquitted the Virgin, but gossip had not acquitted Cati- 
line; on the contrary, it added that he had killed his son to please his jealous 
mistress.^® In the scaletagainst these stories we can only say that for four 
years after Catiline’s^ death the common people of Rome— “the miserable, 
starvehng rabble,” Cicero called them— strewed flowers upon his tomb.^® 
Sallust quotes what purports to be one of his speeches: 



THE OLIGARCHIC REACTION 


CHAP. VIl) 


H3 


Ever since the state fell under the stvay of a few powerful men . . . 
aU influence, rank, and wealth have been in their hands. To us they 
have left danger, defeat, prosecutions, poverty. . . . What have we 
left save only the breath of life? ... Is it not better to die valiantly 
than to lose our wretched and dishonored hves after being the sport 
of other men’s insolence? 


The program on which he proposed to unite the heterogeneous elements 
of revolution was simple; jzovae tabidae—'ntw records”— i.e., a clean sweep 
and aboHtion of all debts. He labored for this purpose with all the energy of 
a Caesar; indeed, for a time he had the sympathy, if npt the secret support, 
of Caesar. “There was nothing,” said Cicero, “that he could not undergo, no 
pains that he would spare of co-operation, vigilance, and toil. He could bear 
cold, hunger, and thirst.” ^ We are assured by his enemies that he organized 
a band of 400 men who planned to kill the consuls and seize the government 
on the first day of 65. The day came, and nothing unusual transpired. At the 
end of 64 Catiline stood against Cicero for the consulate and waged a vigor- 
ous campaign.* Capital took fright and began to leave Italy. The upper classes 
united in support of Cicero; for a year the co 7 icordia ordimim that he had 
asked for was a reality, and he was its perfect voice. 

Blocked pohtically, Catiline turned to war. Secretly his followers organ- 
ized an army of 20,000 men in Etruria, and gathered together in Rome a 
group of conspirators that included representatives of every class from 
senators to slaves, and two urban praetors— Cethegus and Lentulus. In the 
following October Catiline again ran for the consulate. To make sure of 
his election, conservative historians tell us, he planned to have his rival mur- 
dered during the campaign, and to have Cicero assassinated at the same time. 
Claiming that he had been apprised of these plans, Cicero filled the Field of 
Mars with armed guards and superintended the voting. Despite the enthusi- 
astic support of the proletariat, Catiline was again defeated. On November 7, 
says Cicero, several conspirators knocked at his door, but were driven away 
by his guards. On the morrow, seeing Catiline in the Senate, Cicero flung at 
him that superb excoriation which once every schoolboy mouthed. As the 
oration proceeded, the seats around Catiline were emptied one by one, until 
he sat alone. Silently he bore the torrent of accusations, the sharp, relentless 
phrases falling like whips upon his head. Cicero played upon every emotion; 
he spoke of the nation as the common father, and of Catiline as in intent a 
parricide; he charged him— not with evidence given, but by innuendo and 

* It was in this campaign that Cicero’s brother Quintus drew up for him a manual of 
electioneering technique. “Be lavish in your promises,” Quintus advised; “men prefer a false 
promise to a flat refusal. . . . Contrive to get some new scandal aired against your rivals for 
crime, corruption, or immorality.” 



144 CAESAR AND CHRIST (cHAP. VII 

implication— with conspiracy against the state, with theft, adultery, and 
sexual abnormality; finally he petitioned Jove to protect Rome, and to de- 
vote Catiline to eternal punishment. When Cicero had finished, Catiline 
walked out unhindered, and joined his forces in Etruria. His general, L. 
Manlius, sent a last appeal to the Senate: 

We call gods and men to witness that it is not against our country 
that we have taken up arms, nor against the safety of our fellow 
citizens. We, wretched paupers, who through the violence and 
cruelty of usurers are without a country, condemned to scorn and 
indigence, are actuated by only one wish: to guarantee our personal 
security against wrong. We demand neither power nor wealth, those 
great and external causes of strife among mankind. We onlv ask for 
freedom, a treasure that no man will surrender except with life itself. 

We implore you, senators, have pity on your miserable fellow 
citizens! 

The next day, in a second oration, Cicero described the rebel’s following 
as centering around a coterie of perfumed pervmrts, and indulged without 
stint his genius for sarcasm and invective, ending again on a religious note. 
In the following weeks he presented evidence to the Senate purporting to 
show that Catiline had tried to stir up revolution in Gaul. On December 3 
he had Lenrulus, Cethegus, and five other adherents of Catiline arrested. In 
a third oration he declared their guilt, announced their imprisonment, and 
told the Senate and the people that the conspiracy was broken and that they 
might retire to their homes in security and peace. On December 5 he con- 
voked the Senate and asked what should be done with the prisoners. Silanus 
voted that they should be executed. Caesar advised mere imprisonment, 
recalling that the execution of a Roman citizen was forbidden by the Sem- 
pronian Law. In a fourth oration Cicero gently advised death. Cato gave 
the opinion the sanction of his philosophy, and death won the day. Some 
young aristocrats tried to kill Caesar as he left the senate chamber, but he 
escaped. Cicero, with armed men, went to the jail and had the sentence 
carried out with a minimum of delay. Marcus Antonius, co-consul with 
Cicero,^ and father of a famous son, was sent north with an army to destroy 
Catiline’s force. The Senate promised pardon and 200,000 sesterces to every 
man who would leave the rebel ranks; but, says Sallust, “not one deserted 
from Catiline’s camp.” On the plains of Pistoia battle was joined (61). The 
3000 insurgents, far outnumbered, fought to the end around their treasured 
standards, the eagles of Marius. None surrendered or took flight; ever)' one 
of them died on the field, among them Catiline. 

Being essentially a man of thought rather than of action, Cicero was snr- 



CHAP.vn) THE OLIGARCHIC REACTION 145 

prised and impressed by the skill and courage he had shown in suppressing 
a dangerous revolt. “The direction of so great an enterprise,” he told the 
Senate, “seems scarcely possible to merely human wisdom.”^® He com- 
pared himself with Romulus, but considered it a greater deed to have pre- 
served Rome than to have founded it.^® Senators and magnates smiled at his 
language, but they knew that he had saved them. Cato and Catulus hailed 
him as pater patriae, father of his country. When, at the end of 63, he laid 
down his office, all the propertied classes in the community, he tells us, gave 
him thanks, named him immortal, and escorted him in honor to his home.^^ 
The proletariat did not join in these demonstrations. It could not forgive 
him for violating the laws of Rome by putting citizens to death without 
appeal; it felt that he had made no effort to remove the causes of Catiline’s 
revolt, or to mitigate the poverty of the masses. It refused to let him address 
the Assembly on that last day, and listened in anger when he swore that he had 
preserved the city. The revolution was not over. With Caesar’s consulate it 
would begin again. 



CHAPTER VIII 


Literature Under the Revolution 

145-30 B.C. 


I. LUCRETIUS 

AMID this turbulent transformation of economy, government, and 
J/\. morals, literature was not forgotten, and did not quite escape the fever 
and stimulus of the age. Varro and Nepos found safety in antiquarian scholar- 
ship or historical research; Sallust retired from his campaigns to defend his 
party and disguise his morals with brilliant monographs; Caesar stooped 
from empire to grammar and continued his wars in his Commentaries; Catul- 
lus and Calvus sought refuge from politics in the pursuit and poetry of love; 
timid and sensitive spirits like Lucretius hid themselves in the gardens of 
philosophy; and Cicero retreated now and then from the heat of the Forum 
to cool his blood with books. But not one of them found peace. War and 
revolution touched them with pervasive infection; and even Lucretius must 
have known the restlessness which he describes: 

There is a weight on their minds, and a mountain of misery lies on 
their hearts. . . . For each, not knowing what he wants, seeks ahvavs 
to change his place, as if he could drop his burden. Here is one who, 
bored to death at home, goes forth every now and then from his 
palace; but feeling no better abroad, suddenly returns. Off he 
courses, driving his nags to his country house in headlong haste. . . . 

He has hardly crossed the threshold when he yawns, or seeks oblivion 
in a heavy sleep, or even hurries back to the city. So each man flees 
from himself; but, as one might expect, the self vLich he cannot 
escape cleaves to him all the more against his will. He hates himself 
because, a sick man, he does not know the cause of his complaint. 

Any man w ho could see that clearly would cast aside his business, 
and before all else would seek to understand the nature of things.^ 

His poem is our only biography of Titus Lucretius Carus; it is proudly 
reticent about its author; and outside of it, barring a few allusions, Roman 
literature is strangely silent about one of its greatest men. Tradition placed 
his birth at 99 or 95, his death at 55 or 51, b.c. He lived through half a 
century of the Roman revolution: through the Social War, Marian massacres, 

146 



CHAP.VIIl) LITERATURE UNDER THE REVOLUTION 147 

and Sullan proscriptions; through Catihne’s conspiracy and Caesar’s con- 
sulate. The aristocracy to which he probably belonged was in obvious decay; 
the world in which he lived was falling apart into a chaos that left no hfe or 
fortune secure. His poem is a longing for physical and mental peace. 

Lucretius sought refuge in nature, philosophy, and poetry. Perhaps also 
he had a round of love; he must have fared badly, for he writes ungallantly 
of women, denounces the lure of beauty, and advises itching youth to appease 
the flesh with calm promiscuity.^ In woods and fields, in plants and animals, 
in mountain, river, and sea, he found a delight only rivaled by his passion for 
philosophy. He was as impressionable as Wordsworth, as keen of sense as 
Keats, as prone as Shelley to find metaphysics in a pebble or a leaf. Nothing 
of nature’s loveliness or terror was lost upon him; he was stirred by the forms 
and sounds, odors and savors, of things; felt the silences of secret haunts, the 
quiet falling of the night, the lazy waking of the day. Everything natural 
was a marvel to him— the patient flow of water, the sprouting of seeds, the 
endless changes of the sky, the imperturbable persistence of the stars. He 
observed animals with curiosity and sympathy, loved their forms of strength 
or grace, felt their sufferings, and wondered at their wordless philosophy. 
No poet before him had so expressed the grandeur of the world in its detailed 
variety and its congregated power. Here at last nature won the citadels of 
literature, and rewarded her poet with a force of descriptive speech that only 
Homer and Shakespeare have surpassed. 

So responsive a spirit must have been deeply moved in youth by the 
mystery and pageantry of religion. But the ancient faith, which had once 
served family discipline and social order, had lost its hold on the educated 
classes of Rome. Caesar smiled indulgently as he played pontifex vtaximus, 
and the banquets of the priests were the holydays of Roman epicures. A 
small minority of the people were open atheists; now and then some Roman 
Alcibiades noctumally mutilated the statues of the gods.® No longer inspired 
or consoled by the official ritual, many among the lower classes were flocking 
to the bloodstained shrines of the Phrygian Great Mother, or the Cappa- 
docian goddess iMa, or some of the Oriental deities that had entered Italy 
with soldiers or captives from the East. Under the influence of Greek or 
Asiatic cults the old Roman idea of “Orcus” as a colorless subterranean abode 
of all the indiscriminate dead had developed into belief in a literal Hell— a 
'^Tartarus” or “Acheron” of endless suffering for all but a “reborn” initiated 
few."* The sun and the moon were conceived as gods, and every eclipse sent 
terror into lonely villages and teeming tenements. Chaldean fortunetellers 
and astrologers were overrunning Italy, casting horoscopes for paupers and 
millionaires, revealing hidden treasures and future events, interpreting omens 
and dreams wdth cautious ambiguity and profitable flattery. Every unusual 



148 CAESAR AND CHRIST (CHAP. VIII 

occurrence in nature was examined as the warning of a god. It was this mass 
of superstition, ritualism, and hypocrisy that Lucretius knew as religion. 

No wonder that he rebelled against it, and attacked it with all the ardor of 
a religious reformer. We may judge from the bitterness of his resentment the 
depth of his youthful piety and the distress of his disillusionment. Seeking 
for some alternative faith, he passed through the skepticism of Ennius to 
the great poem in which Empedocles had expounded evolution and the con- 
flict of opposites. When he discovered the writings of Epicurus it seemed to 
him that he had found the answers to his questions; that strange mixture of 
materialism and free will, of joyful gods and a godless world, appealed to 
him as a free man’s answer to doubt and fear. A breath of liberation from 
supernatural terrors seemed to come out of Epicurus’ garden, revealing the 
omnipresence of law, the self-ruled independence of nature, the forgivable 
naturalness of death. Lucretius resolved to take this philosophy out of the 
ungainly prose in which Epicurus had expressed it, fuse it into poetic form, 
and offer it to his generation as the way, the truth, and the life. He felt in 
himself a rare and double power— the objective perception of the scientist 
and the subjective emotion of the poet; and he saw in the total order of nature 
a sublimity, and in nature’s parts a beauty, that encouraged and justified this 
marriage of philosophy and poetry. His great purpose aroused all his powers, 
lifted him to a unique intellectual exuberance, and left him, before its com- 
pletion, exhausted and perhaps insane. But his “long and delightful toil” 
gave him a consuming happiness, and he poured into it all the devotion of a 
profoundly religious soul. 

He chose for his work a philosophical rather than a poetic title— De 
Rerum Natura, “On the Nature of Things”— a simple translation of the 
Peri Physeos (“About Nature”) which the pre-Socratics had used as a 
common name for their treatises. He offered it to the sons of Gains Memmius, 
praetor in 58, as a road from fear to understanding. He took as his model the 
Empedoclean epic of exposition, as his speech the quaint bluntness of 
Ennius, as his medium the mobile and versatile hexameter. And then, for- 
getting for a moment the distant carelessness of the gods, he began with a 
fervent apostrophe to Venus conceived, hke Empedocles’ Love, as a symbol 
of creative desire and the ways of peace: 

Mother of Aeneas’ race, delight of men and gods, O nurturing 
Venus! . . . Through thee every kind of life is conceived and born, 
and looks upon the sun; before thee and thy coming the winds flee, 
and the clouds of the sky depart; to thee the miraculous earth lifts up 
sweet flowers; for thee the waves of the sea laugh, and the peaceful 
heavens shine with overspreading light. For as soon as the springtime 
face of day appears, and the fertilizing south wind makes all things 



149 


CHAP.VIIl) LITERATURE UNDER THE REVOLUTION 

fresh and green, then first the birds of the air proclaim thee and thy 
advent, O divine one, pierced to the heart by thy power; then the 
wild herds leap over the glad pastures, and cross the swift streams; 
so, held captive by thy charm, each one follows thee wherever thou 
goest to lead. Then through seas and mountains and rushing rivers, 
and the leafy dwellings of the birds, and the verdant fields, thou 
strikest soft love into the breasts of all creatures, and makest them to 
propagate their generations after their kinds. Since, therefore, thou 
alone rulest the nature of things; since without thee nothing rises to 
the shining shores of light, nothing joyful or lovely is bom; I long for 
thee as partner in the writing of these verses. . . . Grant to my 
words, O goddess, an undying beauty. Cause, meanwhile, the savage 
works of war to sleep and be stUl. ... As Mars reclines upon thy 
sacred form, bend thou around him from above, pour sweet coaxings 
from thy mouth, and beg for thy Romans the gift of peace.® 


n. BE RERUM NATURA 

If we try to reduce to some logical form the passionate disorder of 
Lucretius’ argument, his initial thesis lies in a famous line: 

Tantimt religio potuit suadere malonim— 

“to so many evils religion has persuaded men.” ® He tells the story of 
Iphigenia in Aulis, of countless human sacrifices, of hecatombs offered to 
gods conceived in the image of man’s greed; he recalls the terror of sim- 
plicity and youth lost in a jungle of vengeful deities, the fear of lightning 
and thunder, of death and Hell, and the subterranean horrors pictured in 
Etruscan art and Oriental mysteries. He reproaches mankind for preferring 
sacrificial ritual to philosophical understanding; 

O miserable race of men, to impute to the gods such acts as these, 
and such bitter wrath! What sorrow did men [through such creeds] 
prepare for themselves, what wounds for us, what tears for our chil- 
dren! For piety Hes not in being often seen turning a veiled head to 
stones, nor in approaching ever)' altar, nor in lying prostrate . . . 
before the temples of the gods, nor in sprinkling altars with the blood 
of beasts . . . but rather in being able to look upon all things 'with 
a mind at peace J 

There are gods, says Lucretius, but they dwell far off in happy isolation 
from the thought or cares of men. There, “beyond the flaming ramparts of 
the world” {extra flatjmttmtia moenia mundi),^ beyond the reach of our 
sacrifices and prayers, they live like followers of Epicurus, shunning worldly 



150 


CAESAR AND CHRIST 


(chap. VIIl 

affairs, content with the contemplation of beauty and the practices of friend- 
ship and peace.® They are not the authors of creation, nor the causes of 
events; who would be so unfair as to charge them with the wastefulness, the 
disorder, the sufferings, and the injustices of earthly hfe? No, this infinite 
universe of many worlds is self-contained; it has no law outside itself; nature 
does everything of her own accord. “For who is strong enough to rule the 
sum of things, to hold in hand the mighty bridle of the unfathomable deep? 
—who to turn all the heavens around at once ... to shake the serene sky 
with thunder, to launch the lightning that often shatters temples, and cast 
the bolt that slays the innocent and passes the guilty by?” The only god is 
Law; and the truest worship, as well as the only peace, lies in learning that 
Law and loving it. “This terror and gloom of the mind must be dispelled 
not by the sun’s rays . . . but by the aspect and law of nature.” 

And so, “touching with the honey of the Muses” the rough materialism 
of Democritus, Lucretius proclaims as his basic theorem that “nothing 
exists but atoms and the void” i.e., matter and space. He proceeds at 
once to a cardinal principle (and assumption) of modem science— that the 
quantity of matter and motion in the world never varies; no thing arises out 
of nothing, and destruction is only a change of form. The atoms are 
indestructible, unchangeable, solid, resilient, soundless, odorless, tasteless, 
colorless, infinite. They interpenetrate one another to produce endless com- 
binations and qualities; and they move without cease in the seeming stillness 
of motionless things. 

For often on a hill . . . woolly sheep go creeping wherever the 
dew-sparkling grass tempts them, and the well-fed lambs play and 
butt their heads in sport; yet in the distance all these are blurred to- 
gether and seem but a whiteness resting on a green hUl. Sometimes 
great armies cover wide fields in maneuvers mimicking war; the bril- 
liant bronze of their shields illumines the countryside and is mirrored 
in the sky; the ground trembles and thunders under their marching 
feet and their galloping steeds; and the mountains, buffeted by the 
sound, hurl it back to the very stars: and yet there is a place on the 
pealcs from which these armies appear to be motionless, a litde bright- 
ness resting on the plain.^® 

The atoms * have parts— or “least things”— each vnnhmmt being 
sohd, indivisible, ultimate. Perhaps because of the different arrangement of 
these parts, the atoms vary in size and shape, and so make possible the re- 
freshing diversity of nature. The atoms do not move in straight or uniform 

• Lucretius never uses this word, but calls his primordial particles primordia, elementa, or 
semina (seeds). 



CHAP.VIIl) LITERATURE UNDER THE REVOLUTION I5I 

lines; there is in their motion an incalculable “declination” or deviation, an 
elemental spontaneity that runs through all things and culminates in man’s 
free will.* 

All was once formless; but the gradual assortment of the moving atoms by 
their size and shape produced— without design— air, fire, water, and earth, 
and out of these the sun and moon, the planets and stars. In the infinity of 
space new worlds are ever being bom, and old worlds are wasting away. The 
stars are fires set in the ring of ether (a mist of thinnest atoms) that surrounds 
each planetary system; this cosmic wall of fire constitutes the “flaming 
ramparts of the world.” A portion of the primeval mist broke off from the 
mass, revolved separately, and cooled to form the earth. Earthquakes are not 
the growling of deities, but the expansion of subterranean gases and streams. 
Thunder and lightning are not tbe voice and breath of a god, but natural 
results of condensed and clashing clouds. Rain is not the mercy of Jove, 
but the return to earth of moisture evaporated from it by the sun. 

Life does not differ essentially from other matter; it is a product of moving 
atoms which are individually dead. As the universe took form by the in- 
herent laws of matter, so the earth produced by a purely natural selection 
all the species and organs of fife. 

Nothing arises in the body in order that we may use it, but what 
arises brings forth its own use.^^ ... It was no design of the atoms 
that led them to arrange themselves in order with keen intelligence 
. . . but because many atoms in infinite time have moved and met in 
all manner of ways, trying all combinations. . . . Hence arose the 
beginnings of great things . . . and the generations of living crea- 
tures.^® . . . Many were the monsters that the earth tried to make: 

. . . some without feet, and others without hands or mouth or face, 
or with limbs bound to their frames. ... It was in vain; nature 
denied them growth, nor could they find food or join in the way of 
love. . . . Many kinds of animals must have perished then, unable 
to forge the chain of procreation . . . for those to which nature gave 
no [protective] qualities lay at the mercy of others, and were soon 
destroyed.^® 

Mind {mmnus) is an organ precisely like feet or eyes; it is, like them, a 
tool or function of that soul {amma) or vital breath which is spread as a 
very fine matter throughout the body, and animates every part. Upon the 
highly sensitive atoms that form the mind fall the images or films that per- 
petually emanate from the surfaces of things; this is the source of sensation. 
Taste, smell, hearing, sight, and touch are caused by particles coming from 


Cf. the “indeterminacy” ascribed to the electrons by some physicists of our time. 



152 CAESAR AND CHRIST (CHAP. VIII 

objects and striking tongue or palate, nostrils, ears, eyes, or skin; aU senses 
are forms of touch. The senses are the final test of truth; if they seem to err, 
it is only through misinterpretation, and only another sense can correct them. 
Reason cannot be the test of truth, for reason depends upon experience— 
i.e., sensation. 

The soul is neither spiritual nor immortal. It could not move the body 
unless it too were corporeal; it grows and ages with the body; it is affected 
like the body by disease, medicine, or wine; its atoms are apparently dis- 
persed when the body dies. Soul without body would be senseless, mean- 
ingless; of what use would soul be without organs of touch, taste, smell, 
hearing, and sight? Life is given us not in freehold but on loan, and for so 
long as we can make use of it. When we have exhausted our powers we 
should leave the table of life as graciously as a grateful guest rising from a 
feast. Death itself is not terrible; only our fears of the hereafter make it so. 
But there is no hereafter. Hell is here in the suffering that comes from 
ignorance, passion, pugnacity, and greed; heaven is here in the sapientum 
templa rcrcM— “the serene temples of the wise.” 

Virtue lies not in the fear of the gods, nor in the timid shunning of 
pleasure; it hes in the harmonious operation of senses and faculties guided 
by reason. “Some men wear out their lives for the sake of a statue and fame”; 
but “the real wealth of man is to live simply with a mind at peace” {vivere 
parce aequo anhno)}^ Better than living stiffly in gilded halls is “to lie in 
groups upon the soft grass beside a rivulet and under tall trees,” or to hear 
gentle music, or lose one’s ego in the love and care of our children. Marriage 
is good, but passionate love is a madness that strips the mind of clarity and 
reason. “If one is wounded by the shafts of Venus— whether it be a boy with 
girhsh limbs who launches the shaft, or a woman radiating love from her 
whole body— he is drawn toward the source of the blow, and longs to 
unite.” No marriage and no society can find a sound basis in such erotic 
befuddlement. 

As Lucretius, exhausting his passions on philosophy, finds no room for 
romantic love, so he rejects the romantic anthropology of Greek Rousseau- 
ians who had glorified primitive life. Men were hardier then, to be sure; but 
they dwelt in caves without fire, they mated without marriage, killed with- 
out law, and died of starvation as frequently as people in civilization die of 
overeating.^^ How civilization developed, Lucretius tells in a pretty sum- 
mary of ancient anthropology. Social organization gave man the power to 
survive animals far stronger than himself. He discovered fire from the 
friction of leaves and boughs, developed language from gestures, and learned 
song from the birds; he tamed animals for his use, and himself with marriage 



153 


CHAP.VIIl) LITERATURE UNDER THE REVOLUTION 

and law; he tilled the soil, wove clothing, molded metals into tools; he 
observed the heavens, measured time, and learned navigation; he improved 
the art of killing, conquered the weak, and built cities and states. History is 
a procession of states and civilizations rising, prospering, decaying, dying; 
but each in turn transmits the civilizing heritage of customs, morals, and 
arts; “hke runners in a race they hand on the lamps of hfe” {et quasi cursores 
vital lampada tradunt) 

All things that grow decay: organs, organisms, families, states, races, 
planets, stars; only the atoms never die. The forces of creation and develop- 
ment are balanced by the forces of destruction in a vast diastole and systole 
of life and death. In nature there is evil as well as good; suffering, even un- 
merited, comes to every hfe, and dissolution dogs the steps of every evolu- 
tion. Our earth itself is dying: earthquakes are breaking it up. The land is 
becoming exhausted, rains and rivers erode it, and carry even the mountains 
at last into the sea. Someday our whole stellar system will suffer a like 
mortality; “the walls of the sky will be stormed on every side, and will 
collapse into a crumbling ruin.” But the very moment of mortality betrays 
the invincible vitality of the world. “The wailing of the newborn infant is 
mingled with the dirge sung for the dead.” New systems form, new stars 
and planets, another earth, and fresher life. Evolution begins again. 

Looking back over this “most marvelous performance in all antique litera- 
ture,” we may first recognize its shortcomings: the chaos of its contents, 
left unrevised by the poet’s early death; the repetition of phrases, hnes, whole 
passages; the conception of sun, moon, and stars as no larger than we see 
them; the inability of the system to explain how dead atoms became hfe 
and consciousness; the insensitiveness to the insights, consolations, inspira- 
tions, and moving poetry of faith, and the moral and social functions of 
religion. But how light these faults are in the scale against the brave attempt 
at a rational interpretation of the universe, of history, of rehgion, of disease; * 
the picture of nature as a world of law, in which matter and motion are never 
diminished or increased; the grandeur of the theme and the nobility of its 
treatment; the sustained power of imagination that feels everywhere “the 
majesty of things,” and lifts the visions of Empedocles, the science of 
Democritus, and the ethics of Epicurus into some of the loftiest poetry that 
any age has known. Here was a language still rough and immature, dmost 
devoid as yet of philosophical or scientific terms; Lucretius does not merely 
create a new vocabulary, he forces the old speech into new channels of 

* “There are many seeds of things that support our life; and on the other hand there must 
be many flying about that make for disease and death.” 



CAESAR AND CHRIST 


154 


(chap. VIII 


rhythm and grace; and, while molding the hexameter into an unequaled 
mascuhnity of power, reaches now and then the mellow tenderness and 
fluency of Virgil. The sustained vitahty of his poem shows Lucretius as one 
who amid all sufferings and disappointments enjoyed and exhausted life 
almost from birth to death. 

How did he die? Saint Jerome reports that “Lucretius was driven mad by 
a love philter, after he had written several books. . . . He died by his own 
hand in his forty-fourth year.” The story is uncorroborated, and has been 
much doubted; no saint could be trusted to give an objective account of 
Lucretius. Some critics have found support for the story in the unnatural 
tension of the poem, its poorly organized contents, and its sudden end; but 
one need not be a Lucretius to be excitable, disorderly, or dead. 

Like Euripides, Lucretius is a modem; his thought and feeling are more 
congenial to our time than to the century before Christ. Horace and Virgil 
were deeply influenced by him in their youth, and recall him without name 
in many a lordly phrase; but the attempt of Augustus to restore the old faith 
made it unwise for these imperial proteges to express too openly their 
admiration and their debt. The Epicurean philosophy was as unsuited to the 
Roman mind as epicurean practices suited Roman taste in the age of 
Lucretius.* Rome wanted a metaphysic that would exalt mystic powers 
rather than natural law; an ethic that would make a virile and martial people 
rather than humanitarian lovers of quiet and peace; and a political philosophy 
that, like those of Virgil and Horace, would justify Rome’s imperial mastery. 
In the resurrection of faith after Seneca, Lucretius was almost forgotten. 
Not till Poggio rediscovered him in 1418 did he begin to influence European 
thought. A physician of Verona, Girolamo Fracastoro (1483-1553) took 
from the poet the theory of disease as due to noxious “seeds” {sentina) float- 
ing in the air; and in 1647 Gassendi revived the atomic philosophy. Voltaire 
read the De Rerum Natura devotedly, and agreed with Ovid that its rebel 
verses would last as long as the earth.^® 

In the endless struggle of East and West, of “tender-minded” and con- 
soling faiths vs. a “tough-minded” and materialistic science, Lucretius waged 
alone the most vigorous battle of his time. He is, of course, the greatest of 
philosophical poets. In him, as in Catullus and Qcero, Latin literature came 
of age, and leadership in letters passed at last from Greece to Rome. 


* The words Epicurean and Stoic will be used in these volumes as meaning a believer in the 
metaphysics and ethics of Epicurus, or of Zeno; epicurean and stoic as meaning one who 
practices, or avoids, soft living and sensual indulgence. 



CHAP.vm) LITERATURE UNDER THE REVOLUTION 


155 


III. lesbia’s lover 

In 57 B.c. the Cains Memmius to whom Lucretius dedicated his poem left 
Rome to serve as propraetor in Bithynia. After the growing custom of Roman 
governors he took with him an author— not Lucretius, but a poet different 
from the other in everything but the strength of his passion. Quintus (or 
Caius) Valerius Catullus had come to Rome some five years before from 
his native Verona, where his father was of sufficient standing to be frequent 
host to Caesar. Quintus himself must have had a substantial competence, for 
he owned villas near Tibur and on Lake Garda and had an elegant house in 
Rome. He speaks of these properties as choked with mortgages, and re- 
peatedly proclaims his poverty; but the picture we form of him from his 
poems is that of a polished man of the world who did not bother to earn a 
living, but enjoyed himself unstintingly among the wilder set in the capital. 
The keenest wits, the cleverest young orators and politicians belonged to 
this circle: Marcus Caelius, the impecunious aristocrat who was to become 
a communist; Licinius Calvus, brilliant in poetry and in law; and Helvius 
Cinna, a poet whom Antony’s mob would mistake for one of Caesar’s assassins 
and beat to death. These men opposed Caesar with every epigram at their 
disposal, unaware that their literary revolt reflected the revolution in which 
they lived. They were tired of old forms in literature, of the crudity and 
bombast of Naevius and Ennius; they wished to sing the sentiments of youth 
in new and lyric meters, and with a refinement and delicacy of execution 
known once in the Alexandria of Callimachus, but never yet seen in Rome. 
And they were resentful of old morals, of the mos maiorum perpetually 
preached upon them by their exhausted elders; they announced the sanctity 
of instinct, the innocence of desire, and the grandeur of dissipation. They 
and Catullus were no worse than other young literary blades of their genera- 
tion and the next; Horace, Ovid, Tibullus, Propertius, even the shy Virgil 
in his youth, made life and verse revolve around any woman, married or 
not, who fed their muses with facile casual love. 

The liveliest lady in this group was Clodia, of the proud old Claudian gens 
that even now had emperors in its loins.* Apuleius assures us that it was she 
whom Catullus named Lesbia in memory of the Sappho whose poems he 
occasionally translated, often imitated, and always loved. Arriving in Rome 
at the age of twenty-two, he cultivated her friendship while her husband 
governed Cisalpine Gaul. He was fascinated the moment she “set her shining 
foot on the well-worn threshold”; he called her his “lustrous goddess of the 


Cf. p. 1 15. 



CAESAR AND CHRIST 


156 


(chap, vin 


delicate step”; and indeed a woman’s walk, like her voice, may be in itself 
a sufficient seduction. She accepted him graciously as one of her worshipers; 
and the enraptured poet, unable to match otherwise the gifts of his rivals, 
laid at her feet the most beautiful lyrics in the Latin tongue. For her he 
translated perfectly Sappho’s description of the lover’s frenzy that now 
raged in him;^^ and to the sparrow that she pressed to her bosom he indited 
a jewel of jealousy: 


Sparrow, delight of my beloved. 

Who plays with you, and holds you to her breast; 
Who offers her forefinger to your seeking. 

And tempts your sharp bite; 

I know not what dear jest it pleases my shining one 
To make of my desire! . . .* 


For a while he was consumed with happiness, played attendance upon her 
daily, read his poems to her, forgot everjnhing but his infatuation. 

Let us live, Lesbia mine, and love. 

And all the mumbling of harsh old men 
We shall reckon as a pennyworth. 

Suns may sink and return; 

For us, when once our brief sun has set. 

There comes the long sleep of everlasting night. 

Give me a thousand kisses, then a hundred. 

Then another thousand, then a second hundred, 

Then still another thousand, then a hundred. 

And when we shall have reached many thousands 
We shall confuse the count, lest we should ever know, 

Or some mean soul should envy us. 

Learning the great sum of our kisses.f 


* No one has yet transformed Catullus’ poems into equivalent English verse. The foregoing 
is an almost hteral translation of 

Passer, deliciae meae puellae, 
quicum ludere, quern in sinu tenere, 
cui primum digitum dare adpetenti 
et acris solet incitari morsus, 
cum desiderio meo nitenti 
carum nescio quid libet iocari. . . .33 

t Vivamus, mea Lesbia, atque amemus, 
rumoresque senum severiorum 
omnes unius aestimemus assis. 

Soles occidere et redire possunt; 
nobis cum semel occidit brevis lux, 
nox est perpetua una dormienda. 

Da mi basia mille, deinde centum, 

dein mille altera, dein secunda centum. . . .34 



CHAP.VIIl) LITERATURE UNDER THE REVOLUTION 157 

We do not know how long this ecstasy lasted; probably his thousands 
wearied her, and she who had betrayed her husband for him found it a 
relief to betray him for another. Her benefactions now ranged so widely 
that Catullus madly fancied her “embracing at once three hundred adul- 
terers.” In the very heat of his love he came to hate her {odi et amo and 
rejected with a Keatsian image her protestations of fidehty: 

A woman’s words to hungry lover said 
Should be upon the flowing winds inscribed, 

Upon swift streams engraved.*'^ 

When sharp doubt became dull certainty his passion turned to bitterness 
and coarse revenge; he accused her of yielding to tavern habitues, denounced 
her new lovers with obscene abandon, and meditated' suicide, poetically. At 
the same time he was capable of nobler feelings; he addressed to his friend 
Manlius a touching epithalamium or wedding song, envying him the whole- 
some comradeship of marriage, the security and stability of a home, and the 
happy tribulations of parentage. He snatched himself from the scene by 
accompanying Memmius to Bithynia, but he was disappointed in his hopes 
of restoring there his spirits or his purse. He went out of his way to find the 
grave of a brother who had died in the Troad; over it he performed reverently 
the ancestral burial rites; and soon afterward he composed tender lines 
that gave the world a famous phrase: 

Dear brother, through many states and seas 
Have I come to this sorrowful sacrifice. 

Bringing you the last gift for the dead. . . . 

Accept these offerings wet with fraternal tears; 

And forever, brother, hail and farewell.* 

His sojourn in Asia changed and softened him. The skeptic who had 
written of death as “the sleep of an eternal night” was moved by the old 
religions and ceremonies of the East. In the rich and flowing verse of his 
greatest poem, “Atys,” he described with vivid intensity the worship of 
Cybele, and caught an exotic fervor in the lament of the self-emasculated 
devotee over the joys and friends of his youth. In “Peleus and Thetis” he 
retold the tale of Peleus and Ariadne in hexameters of such melodious 
delicacy as even Virgil would hardly equal. In a small yacht bought at 
Amastris he sailed through the Black Sea, the Aegean, and the Adriatic, and 

• Mukas per genres et multa per aequora vectus 
advenio has miseras, frater, ad inferias, 
ut te postremo donarem munere mortis. . . . 

Accipe fratemo multum manantia fletu, 
atque in perpetuum, frater, ave atque vale.^s 



CAESAR AND CHRIST 


158 


(chap, viii 


up the Po to Lake Garda and his villa at Sirmio. “Oh, what happier way is 
there to escape the cares of the world,” he asked, “than to return to our own 
homes and altars, and rest on our own beloved bed.? ” Men begin by 
seeking happiness and are content at last with peace. 

We know Catullus more intimately than most Roman poets, because his 
subject is nearly always himself. These lyric cries of love and hate reveal 
a sensitive and kindly spirit, capable of generous feeling even for relatives, 
but unpleasantly self-centered, deliberately obscene, and merciless to his 
enemies. He published their most private peculiarities, their pederastic pro- 
pensities, their bodily odor. One of them washes his teeth with urine, after 
an old Spanish custom; “ another is so foul of breath that if he should open 
his mouth all persons near him would fall dead.^^ Catullus oscillates easily 
between love and offal, kisses and fundaments; he rivals Martial as a guide 
to the street-corner urology of Rome, and suggests in his contemporaries and 
his class a mixture of primitive coarseness with civilized refinement, as if 
educated Romans, however versed in the literature of Greece, could never 
quite forget the stable and the camp. Catullus pleads, like Martial, that he 
must salt his lines with dirt to hold his audience. 

He atoned for these faults by the conscientious perfection of his verse. 
His hendecasyllabics leap with a naturalness and spontaneity that escape 
the artifices of Horace and occasionally rise above all the graces of Virgil. It 
took much art to conceal his art, and Catullus more than once refers to the 
painful toil and care that produced his quick intelhgibUity and apparent 
ease. His vocabulary helped him to this end; he molded the words of popular 
speech into poetry, and enriched the Latin of literature with affectionate 
diminutives as well as tavern slang. He avoided inversions and obscurities, 
and gave to his lines a limpid fluidity grateful to the ear. He pored over the 
poets of Hellenistic Alexandria and ancient Ionia: mastered the smooth 
technique and varied meters of Callimachus, the lusty directness of Archil- 
ochus, the vinous exuberance of Anacreon, the amorous ecstasy of Sappho; 
indeed, it is largely through him that we must guess how these poets wrote. 
He learned their lessons so thoroughly that he became, from their pupil, 
their equal. He did for Latin poetry what Cicero did for Latin prose: he took 
it as crude potency and lifted it to an art that only Virgil would surpass. 


IV. THE SCHOLARS 

How were Latin books written, illustrated, bound, published, sold? For 
school exercises, short letters, transient commercial records, the Romans through 
antiquity wrote with a stylus upon waxed tablets and erased with the thumb. 



159 


CHAP.VIIl) LITERATURE UNDER THE REVOLUTION 

The oldest literary Latin known to us was written with quill and ink upon 
paper manufactured in Egypt from the pressed and glued leaves of the papyrus 
tree. In the first centuries of our era parchment made from the dried skins of 
animals began to rival papyrus as a receptacle of literature and important docu- 
ments. A folded sheet of membrane, or vellum, constituted a diplo?m, or two- 
fold. Usually a literary work was issued as a roll {volimien, “wound up”), and 
was read by unrolling as the reading progressed. The text was customarily 
written two or three narrow cohmmae to a page, often without punctuation of 
clauses or even separation of words. Some manuscripts were illustrated by ink 
drawings; V arro’s Imagines, e.g., consisted of 700 portraits of famous men, each 
picture accompanied by a biographical note. Anyone could publish a manu- 
script by hiring slaves to make copies, and selling the copies. Rich men had 
clerks who copied for them any book they wished to own. Since copyists were 
fed rather than paid, books were cheap. First “printings” were usually of a thou- 
sand copies. Booksellers bought wholesale from publishers like Atticus, and sold 
at retail in arcade bookstalls. Neither publisher nor bookseller gave the author 
anything except courtesy and occasional gifts; royalties were unknown. Private 
libraries were now numerous; and about 40 b.c. Asinius PoUio made his great 
collection the first public library in Rome. Caesar planned a still larger one, and 
made Varro its director; but this, like so many of his ideas, waited upon Augustus 
for its fulfillment. 

Stimulated by these facilities, Roman literature and scholarship began to equal 
the industry of the Alexandrians. Poems, pamphlets, histories, textbooks rivaled 
the Tiber’s floods; every aristocrat adorned his escapades with verse, every lady 
composed words and music, every general wrote memoirs. It was an age of 
“outlines”; summaries on every subject struggled to meet the needs of a hurried 
commercial age. Marcus Terentius Varro, despite many military campaigns, 
found time during his eighty-nine years ( 1 16-26 b.c.) to synopsize nearly every 
branch of knowledge; his 620 “volumes” (some seventy-four books) constituted 
a one-man encyclopedia for his time. Fascinated by the pedigrees of words, he 
wrote an essay 0 ?i the Latin Language, now our chief guide to early Roman 
speech. Perhaps in co-operation with the aims of Augustus, he tried in his treatise 
On Country Life {Be Re Rustica, 36 b.c.) to encourage a return to the land as 
the best refuge from the disorder of civil strife. “My eightieth year,” said his 
introduction, “warns me that I must pack up and prepare to leave this life”; he 
would make his last testament a guide to rural happiness and peace. He admired 
the sturdy women w'ho were delivered of children in the fields and soon resumed 
wmrk.^® He mourned the low native birth rate that w'as transforming the popula- 
tion of Rome; “formerly the blessing of children was woman’s pride; now she 
boasts with Ennius that she Svould rather face battle three times than bear one 
child.’ ” In his Divine Antiquities he concluded that the fertility, order, and 
courage of a nation require moral commandments supported by religious belief. 
Adopting the distinction of the great jurist Q. Mucius Scaevola between two 
kinds of religion— one for philosophers and one for the people he argued that 



i6o 


CAESAR AND CHRIST 


(chap. VIH 

the second must be upheld regardless of its intellectual defects; and though he 
himself accepted only a vague pantheism,* he proposed a vigorous attempt to 
restore the worship of Rome’s ancient deities. Influenced by Cato and Polybius, 
he in his turn decisively affected the religious policy of Augustus and the pious 
ruralism of Virgil. 

As if to complete the work of the elder Cato in every field, Varro continued 
the censor’s Origines in his Life of the Roman People— a history of Roman civil- 
ization. It is a pity that time has scuttled this and nearly all of Varro ’s work, 
while preserving the schoolboy biographies of Cornelius Nepos. In Rome history 
was an art, never also a science; not even in Tacitus did it rise to a critical scrutiny 
and summary of sources. History as rhetoric, however, found in this age a bril- 
liant practitioner— Caius Sallustius Crispus (86-35 b.c.). He played a vigorous role 
as politician and warrior on Caesar’s side, governed Numidia, stole with skill, and 
spent a fortune on women; then he retired to a life of luxury and letters in a 
Roman villa that became famous for its gardens and was to be the home of 
emperors. His books, like politics, were a continuation of war by other means; 
his Histories, Jugurthine War, and Catiline were able defenses of the populares, 
powerful attacks upon the “old guard.” He exposed the moral decay of Rome,t 
charged the Senate and the courts with placing property rights above human 
rights, and put into the mouth of Marius a speech asserting the natural equality 
of all classes and demanding a career open to talent wherever bom.^® He deepened 
his narratives with philosophical commentary and psychological analysis of char- 
acter, and carved out a style of epigrammatic compactness and vivid rapidity 
which became a model for Tacitus. 

That style, like almost all Roman prose of Sallust’s century and the next, took 
its color and tone from the oratory of the Forum and the courts. The develop- 
ment of the legal profession, and the growth of a talkative democracy, had 
widened the demand for public speaking. Schools of rhetoric were multiplying 
despite governmental hostility; “rhetoricians,” said Cicero, “are everywhere.” 
Great masters of the art appeared in the first half of the first century before 
Christ: Marcus Antonius (father of Mark), Lucius Crassus, Sulpicius Rufus, 
Quintus Hortensius. We may imagine the strength of their lungs when we hear 
of audiences that overflowed from the Forum into neighboring temples and 
balconies. The flamboyant eloquence and purchasable conscience of Hortensius 
made him the darling of the aristocracy and one of Rome’s richest men; he left 
his heirs 10,000 casks of wine.^®® His delivery was so animated that famous actors 
like Roscius and Aesopus attended the trials at which he pleaded, to perfect their 
acting by studying his gestures and his delivery. Following the example of old 
Cato, he revised and published his speeches— an art which his rival Cicero per- 
fected, and which furthered the influence of rhetoric upon all Roman prose. It 

• “The soul of the world is God, and its parts are the true divinities.” 

t Varro claims that Sallust “was taken in adulterj"^ by Annius iMilo, soundly beaten with 
thongs, and permitted to escape only after paying a sum of money”; but this, too, may be 



CHAP.vm) LITERATURE UNDER THE REVOLUTION l6l 

was through oratory that the Latin language reached its full height of colorful 
eloquence, masculine power, and almost Oriental grace. Indeed, the younger 
orators who came after Hortensius and Cicero condemned the luxurious adorn- 
ment and passionate turbulence of what they called the “Asianic” style; and 
Caesar, Calvus, Brutus, and Pollio pledged themselves to a calmer, chaster, sparer 
“Attic” speech. Here, so long ago, the battle lines formed between “romanticism” 
and “classicism”— between the emotional and the intellectual view of hfe and 
domination of style. Even in oratory, the young classicists complained, the East 
was conquering Rome. 


V. Cicero’s pen 

Proud of his speeches, and aware that they were making literature, Cicero 
felt keenly the criticism of the “Attic” school, and defended himself in a 
long series of treatises on oratorical art. In lively dialogues he sketched the 
history of Roman eloquence and laid down the rules for composition, prose 
rhythm, and delivery. He did not admit that his own style was “Asian”; he 
had modeled it, he claimed, upon that of Demosthenes; and he reminded the 
Atticists that their cold and passionless speech drove audiences to sleep or 
flight. 

The fifty-seven orations that have come down to us from Cicero illustrate 
all the tricks of successful eloquence. They excel in the passionate presenta- 
tion of one side of a question or a character, the entertainment of the auditors 
with humor and anecdote, the appeal to vanity, prejudice, sentiment, patriot- 
ism, and piety, the ruthless exposure of the real or reported, public or private, 
faults of the opponent or his chent, the skillful turning of attention from 
unfavorable points, the barrage of rhetorical questions framed to make 
answer difficult or damaging, the heaping up of charges, in periodic sen- 
tences whose clauses are lashes, and whose torrent overwhelms. These 
speeches do not pretend to be fair; they are defamations rather than declama- 
tions, briefs that take every advantage of that freedom of abuse which, 
though forbidden to the stage, was allowed in the Forum and the courts. 
Cicero does not hesitate to apply to his victims terms like “swine,” “pest,” 
“butcher,” “filth”; he tells Piso that virgins kill themselves to escape his 
lechery, and excoriates Antony for being publicly affectionate to his wife. 
Audiences and juries enjoyed such vituperation, and no one took it too 
seriously. Cicero corresponded amiably with Piso a few years after the brutal 
attack of the In Yhonem. It is to be admitted, further, that Cicero’s orations 
abound rather in egotism and rhetoric than in moral sincerity, philosophical 
wisdom, or even legal acumen or depth. But what eloquence! Even Demos- 
thenes was not so vivid, vital, exuberantly witty, so full of the salt and tang 
of the human fray. Certainly no man before or after Gcero spoke a Latin so 



CAESAR AND CHRIST 


162 


(chap. VHI 


seductively charming and fluent, so elegantly passionate; this was the zenith 
of Latin prose. “You have discovered all the treasures of oratory,” said the 
generous Caesar in dedicating his book On Analogy to Cicero; “and you have 
been the first to employ them. Thereby you have laid the Roman people 
under a mighty obligation, and you honor your fatherland. You have gained 
a triumph to be preferred to that of the greatest generals. For it is a nobler 
thing to enlarge the boundaries of human intelligence than those of the 
Roman Empire.” 

The speeches betray the politician; the letters of Cicero bare the man, 
and make even the politician forgivable. Nearly all of them were dictated 
to a secretary and never revised by Cicero; most of them were written with 
no thought of publication; seldom, therefore, has a man’s secret soul been 
so completely exposed. “He who reads these letters,” said Nepos, “will not 
much need a history of those times’’;^® in them the most vital part of the 
revolutionary drama is seen from within, all blinds removed. Usually their 
style is artless and direct and dances with humor and wit; their language 
is an attractive mixture of Hterary grace and colloquial ease. They are the 
most interesting of Cicero’s remains; indeed, of all extant Latin prose. It is 
natural that we shoifld find in so large a correspondence (864 letters, ninety 
of them to Cicero) occasional contradictions and insincerities. There is 
no sign here of the rehgious piety and belief that appear so frequently in 
Cicero’s essays or in those speeches in which he plays up the gods as his last 
trump. His private opinion of various men, especially of Caesar, does not 
always conform with his pubhc protestation.®® His incredible vanity ap- 
pears more amiably here than in his orations, where he seems to be carrying 
his own statue with him wherever he goes; he smilingly confesses that “my 
own applause has the greatest weight with me.”®^ Lie assures us, with charm- 
ing innocence, that “if ever any man was a stranger to vainglory it is my- 
self.”®® We are amused to find so many letters about money and so much 
ado about so many homes. Besides modest villas at Arpinum, Asturae, Puteoli, 
and Pompeii, Cicero had an estate at Formiae valued at 250,000, another at 
Tusculum worth 500,000, and a palace on the Palatine that cost him 3,500,000 
sesterces.* Such comfort seems outrageous in a philosopher. 

But which of us is so virtuous that his reputation could survive the publi- 
cation of his intimate correspondence? Indeed, as we continue to read these 
letters, we almost come to hke the man. He had no more faults, perhaps no 

* This last sum had been raised by a loan from a client; we do not know if it was repaid. 
Forbidden by law to receive fees, lawyers received loans instead. Another way of beintr paid" 
was to be remembered in a client’s will. Through bequests of this sort or another Cic^o in- 
herited 20,000,000 sesterces in thirty years .53 The constitution of man always rewrites the 
constitutions of states. 



CHAP.VIIl) LITERATURE UNDER THE REVOLUTION 163 

greater vanity, than we; he made the mistake of immortalizing them with 
perfect prose. At his best he was a hard worker, a tender father, a good 
friend. We see him in his home, loving his books and his children, and trying 
to love his wife, the rheumatic and irritable Terentia, whose wealth and 
eloquence equaled his own. They were too rich to be happy; their worries 
and quarrels were always in large figures; at last, in their old age, he divorced 
her over some financial dispute. Soon afterward he married Publilia, who 
attracted him by having more money than years; but when she showed dis- 
hke for his daughter Tullia he sent Publilia away, too. Tullia he loved hu- 
manly beyond reason; he grieved almost to madness at her death and wished 
to build a temple to her as a deity. Pleasanter are the letters to and about 
Tiro, his chief secretary, who took his dictation in shorthand and managed his 
finances so ably and honestly that Cicero rewarded him with freedom. Most 
numerous are the letters to Atticus, who invested Cicero’s savings, extricated 
him from financial difficulties, published his writings, and gave him excellent 
unheeded advice. To Atticus, wisely absent in Greece at the height of the 
revolution, Cicero writes a letter of typical cordiality and charm; 

There is nothing of which I so much feel the want as of him with 
whom I can communicate everything that concerns me; who loves me, 
who is prudent; to whom I can speak without flattery, dissimulation, 
or reserve. My brother, who is all candor and kindness, is away. . . . 

And you, who have so often relieved my cares and anxieties by your 
counsel, who used to be my companion in public matters, my confi- 
dant in all private ones, the partaker of all my words and thoughts— 
where are you?®* 

In those turbulent days when Caesar crossed the Rubicon, conquered 
Pompey, and made himself dictator, Cicero retired for a moment from politi- 
cal life and sought solace in reading and writing philosophy. “Remember,” 
he begged Atticus, “not to give up your books to anybody, but to keep 
them, as you promised, for me. I entertain the strongest affection for them, 
as I now feel disgust for everything else.”®® In his youth, defending the poet 
Archias in the most modest and amiable of his speeches, he had praised the 
study of literature as “nourishing our adolescence, adorning our prosperity, 
and delighting our old age.”®® Now he took his own counsel, and in little 
more than two years wrote almost a library of philosophy.* The dissolution 
of religious belief in the higher classes had left a moral vacuum, by which 
Rome seemed to be drawn into a disintegration of character and society. 

* De Republica, 54 b.c.; De Legibus, 52; Academica, De Consolatione, and De Finibiis, 45; 
De Natiira Deontm, De Divinatione, De Fato, De Virtutibus, De Officiis, De A?nicitia, De 
Senectute, De Gloria, Disputationes Titsculanae, all 44 b.c. In these same nvo years, 45-44, 
Cicero wrote five books on oratory. 



164 CAESAR AND CHRIST (CHAP. VIH 

Cicero dreamed that philosophy might serve as a substitute for theology in 
providing for these classes a guide and stimulus to right hving. He resolved 
not to construct one more system, but to summarize the teachings of the 
Greek sages and offer them as his last gift to his people.®’’ He was honest 
enough to confess that he was for the most part adapting, sometimes trans- 
lating, the treatises of Panaetius, Poseidonius, and other recent Greeks.®® 
But he transformed the dull prose of his models into limpid and graceful 
Latin, enlivened his discourse with dialogue, and passed quickly over the 
deserts of logic and metaphysics to the living problems of conduct and 
statesmanship. Like Lucretius he had to invent a philosophical terminology; 
he succeeded, and put both language and philosophy heavily in his debt. Not 
since Plato had wisdom worn such prose. 

It was from Plato above all that his ideas stemmed. He did not relish the dog- 
matism of the Epicureans, who “talk of divine things with such assurance that 
you would imagine they had come directly from an assemblage of the gods”; nor 
yet that of the Stoics, who so labor the argument from design that “you would 
suppose even the gods had been made for human use” a theory that Cicero 
himself, in other moods, would not find incredible. His starting point is that of 
the New Academy— a lenient skepticism which denied all certainties and found 
probability sufficient for human life. “In most things,” he writes, “my philosophy 
is that of doubt.®^ . . . May I have your leave not to know what I do not 
know?” “Those who seek to learn my personal opinion,” he says, “show an 
unreasonable degree of curiosity”; but his coyness soon yields to his talent 
for expression. He scorns sacrifices, oracles, and auguries, and devotes an entire 
treatise to disproving divination. Against the widespread cult of astrology he 
asks if all the men slain at Cannae had been bom under the same star.®® He even 
doubts that a knowledge of the future would be a boon; the future may be as 
unpleasant as much else of the trath that we so recklessly chase. He vainly thinks 
to make short work of old beliefs by laughing them out of court: “When we 
call com Ceres and wine Bacchus we use a common figure of speech; but do you 
imagine that anybody is so insane as to believe that the thing he feeds upon is 
a god?”®®“ Nevertheless, he is as skeptical of atheism as of any other dogma. 
He rejects the atomism of Democritus and Lucretius; it is as unlikely that 
unguided atoms— even in infinite time— could fall into the order of the existing 
world as that the letters of the alphabet should spontaneously form the Annales 
of Ennius.®^ Our ignorance of the gods is no guarantee of their nonexistence; and 
indeed, Cicero argues, the general agreement of mankind establishes a balance 
of probability in favor of Providence. He concludes that religion is indispensable 
to private morals and public order and that no man of sense will attack it.®® 
Hence, while writing against divination, he continued to fulfill the functions of 
official augur. It was not quite hypocrisy; he would have called it statesmanship. 
Roman morals, society, and government were bound up with the old religion 



CHAP.Vin) LITERATURE UNDER THE REVOLUTION 165 

and could not safely let it die. (The emperors would reason so in persecuting 
Christianity.) When his beloved Tullia died, Cicero inclined more strongly than 
ever to the hope of personal immortality. A4any years before, in the “Dream of 
Scipio” with which he ended his Republic, he had borrowed from Pythagoras, 
Plato, and Eudoxus a complex and eloquent myth of a life beyond the grave, in 
which the good great dead enjoyed eternal bliss. But in his private correspond- 
ence-even in the letters that condoled with bereaved friends— there is no men- 
tion of an afterlife. 

Knowing the skepticism of his age, he based his moral and political treatises 
on purely secular grounds, independent of supernatural sanctions. He begins (in 
De Finiims) by inquiring for the road to happiness, and hesitantly agrees with 
the Stoics that virtue alone suffices. Therefore (in De Officiis) he examines the 
way of virtue, and by the charm of his style succeeds for a time in making duty 
interesting. “All men are brothers,” he writes, and “the whole world is to be 
considered as the common city of gods and men.” The most perfect morality 
would be a conscientious loyalty to this whole. More immediately a man owes 
it to himself and society, first of all, to establish a sound economic basis to his 
life, and then to fulfill his duties as a citizen. Wise statesmanship is nobler than 
the subtlest philosophy.®^ 

Monarchy is the best form of government when the monarch is good, the 
worst when he is bad— a truism soon to be illustrated in Rome. Aristocracy is 
good when the really best rule; but Cicero, as a member of the middle class, 
could not quite admit that the old entrenched families were the best. Democracy 
is good when the people are virtuous, which, Cicero thought, is never; besides, 
it is vitiated by the false assumption of equality. The best form of government is 
a mixed constitution, like that of pre-Gracchan Rome: the democratic power of 
the assemblies, the aristocratic power of the Senate, the almost royal power 
of the consuls for a year. Without checks and balances monarchy becomes 
despotism, aristocracy becomes oligarchy, democracy becomes mob rule, chaos, 
and dictatorship. Writing five years after Caesar’s consulate, Cicero cast a dart 
in his direction: 

Plato says that from the exaggerated license which people call 
liberty, tyrants spring up as from a root . . . and that at last such lib- 
erty reduces a nation to slavery. Everything in excess is changed into 
its opposite. ... For out of such an ungovemed populace one is 
usually chosen as leader . . . someone bold and unscrupulous . . . 
who curries favor with the people by giving them other men’s prop- 
erty. To such a man, because he has much reason for fear if he remains 
a private citizen, the protection of public office is given, and continu- 
ally renewed. He surrounds himself with an armed guard, and emerges 
as a tyrant over the very people who raised him to power.®® 

Nevertheless, Caesar won; and Cicero thought it best to bury his discontent in 
melodious platitudes on law, friendship, glory, and old age. Silent leges inter 



CAESAR AND CHRIST 


1 66 


(chap, vni 


arma, he said— “laws are silent in time of war”; but at least he could muse on the 
philosophy of law. Following the Stoics, he defined law as “right reason in agree- 
ment with nature”; i.e., law seeks to make orderly and stable the relations 
that rise out of the social impulses of men. “Nature has inclined us to love men” 
(society), “and this is the foundation of law.” Friendship should be based 
not upon mutual advantage but upon common interests cemented and limited by 
virtue and justice; the law of friendship should be “neither to ask dishonorable 
things, nor to do them if asked.” An honorable life is the best guarantee of a 
pleasant old age. An indulgent and intemperate youth delivers to age a body 
prematurely worn out; but a life well spent can leave both body and mind sound 
to a hundred years; witness Masinissa. Devotion to study may make one “unaware 
of the stealthy approach of old age.” Age as well as youth has its glories— a 
tolerant wisdom, the respectful affection of children, desire and ambition’s fever 
cooled. Age may fear death, but not if the mind has been formed by philosophy. 
Beyond the grave there will be, at the best, a new and happier life; and at the 
worst there will be peace.'^® 

All in all, Cicero’s essays in philosophy are meager in result. Like his states- 
manship they clung too anxiously to orthodoxy and tradition. He had all 
the curiosity of a scientist and all the timidity of a bourgeois; even in his 
philosophy he remained a politician, reluctant to offend any vote. He col- 
lected the ideas of others, and balanced pros and cons so well that we come 
out from his sessions by the same door wherein we went. Only one thing 
redeems these little books— the simple beauty of their style. How pleasant 
Cicero’s Latin is, how easy to read, how smoothly and clearly the stream 
of language flows! When he narrates events he catches some of the vivacity 
that made his speeches chain attention; when he describes a character it is 
with such skill that he mourns that he has no time to be Rome’s greatest 
historian; when he lets himself go he flowers into the balanced clauses and 
crashing periods which he had learned from Isocrates, and with which he 
had made the Forum resound. His ideas are those of the upper classes, but 
his style aims to reach the people; for them he labors to be clear, toils to 
make his truisms thrilling, and salts abstractions with anecdote and wit. 

He re-created the Latin language. He extended its vocabulary, forged 
from it a flexible instrument for philosophy, fitted it to be the vehicle of 
learning and literature in western Europe for seventeen hundred years. 
Posterity remembered him more as an author than as a statesman. When, 
despite all his reminders, men had almost forgotten the glory of his consulate, 
they cherished his conquests in letters and eloquence. And since the world 
honors form as well as substance, art as well as knowledge and power, he 
achieved, of all Romans, a fame second only to Caesar’s. It was an exception 
that he could never forgive. 



CHAPTER IX 


Caesar 

100-44 B.C. 


I. THE RAKE 

C AIUS JULIUS CAESAR traced his pedigree to lulus Ascanius, son 
of Aeneas, son of Venus, daughter of Jupiter: he began and ended as 
a god. The Julian gens, though impoverished, was one of the oldest and 
noblest in Italy. A Caius Julius had been consul in 489, another in 482, a 
Vopiscus Julius in 473, a Sextus Julius in 1 57, another in 91.^ From his uncle- 
in-law Marius he derived by a kind of avuncular heredity an inclination 
toward radical politics. His mother Aurelia was a matron of dignity and 
wisdom, frugally managing her small home in the unfashionable Subura— 
a district of shops, taverns, and brothels. There Caesar was bom 100 b.c., 
allegedly by the operation that bears his name.* 

“Now was this Caesar,” says Holland’s Suetonius, “wondrous docible and 
apt to learn.” His tutor in Latin, Greek, and rhetoric was a Gaul; with him 
Caesar unconsciously began to prepare himself for his greatest conquest. 
The youth took readily to oratory and almost lost himself in juvenile author- 
ship. He was saved by being made military aide to Marcus Thermus in Asia. 
Nicomedes, ruler of Bithynia, took such a fancy to him that Cicero and 
other gossips later taunted him with having “lost his virginity to a king.”^ 
Returning to Rome in 84, he married Cossutia to please his father; when, 
soon afterward, his father died, he divorced her and married Corneha, 
daughter of that Cinna who had taken over the revolution from Marius. 
When Sulla came to power he ordered Caesar to divorce Cornelia; when 
Caesar refused, Sulla confiscated his patrimony and Cornelia’s dowry, and 
listed him for death. 

Caesar fled from Italy and joined the army in Cilicia. On Sulla’s death he 
returned to Rome (78), but finding his enemies in power he left again for 
Asia. Pirates captured him on the way, took him to one of their Cilician 
lairs, and offered to free him for twenty talents (172,000); he reproached 

* It was already an ancient mode of birth, being mentioned in the laws ascribed to Numa. 
Caesar s cognomen was not derived from the operation {caems ab utero matris ) ; long before 
him there had been Caesars among the JuliL 

167 


l68 CAESAR AND CHRIST ( CHAP. IX 

them for underestimating his value, and volunteered to give them fifty. Hav- 
ing sent his servants to raise the money, he amused himself by writing poems 
and reading them to his captors. They did not like them. He called them 
dull barbarians and promised to hang them at the earliest opportunity. 
When the ransom came he hurried to Miletus, engaged vessels and crews, 
chased and caught the pirates, recovered the ransom, and crucified them; 
but being a man of great clemency, he had their throats cut first.® Then he 
went to Rhodes to study rhetoric and philosophy. 

Back again in Rome, he divided his energies between politics and love. 
He was handsome, though already worried about his thinning hair. When 
Cornelia died (68) he married Pompeia, granddaughter of Sulla. As this was 
a purely political marriage, he did not scruple to carry on liaisons in the 
fashion of his time; but in such number and with such ambigendered di- 
versity that Curio (father of his later general) called him ominum mulierum 
vir et o?nmum virorum mulier—^tht. husband of every woman and the wife 
of every man.”'‘ He would continue these habits in his campaigns, dallying 
with Qeopatra in Egypt, with Queen Eunoe in Numidia, and with so many 
ladies in Gaul that his soldiers in fond jest called him moechus calvus, the 
“bald adulterer”; in his triumph after conquering Gaul they sang a couplet 
warning all husbands to keep their wives under lock and key as long as 
Caesar was in town. The aristocracy hated him doubly— for undermining 
their privileges and seducing their wives. Pompey divorced his wife for her 
intimacy with Caesar. Cato’s passionate hostility was not all philosophical: 
his half sister Servilia was the most devoted of Caesar’s mistresses. When 
Cato, suspecting Caesar’s comphcity with Catiline, challenged him in the 
Senate to read aloud a note just brought to him, Caesar passed it to Cato 
without comment; it was a love letter from Servilia.® Her passion for him 
continued throughout his fife, and merciless gossip, in her later years, charged 
her with surrendering her daughter Tertia to Caesar’s lust. During the Civil 
War, at a pubhc auction, Caesar “knocked down” some confiscated estates 
of irreconcilable aristocrats to Servilia at a nominal price; when some ex- 
pressed surprise at the low figure, Cicero remarked, in a pithy pun that 
might have cost him his fife, Tertia deducta, which could either mean “a 
third off,” or refer to the rumor that Servilia had brought her daughter to 
Caesar. Tertia became the wife of Caesar’s prime assassin, Cassius. So the 
amours of men mingle with the commotions of states. 

Probably these diversified investments helped Caesar’s rise as well as his 
fall. Every woman he won was an influential friend, usually in the enemy’s 
camp; and most of them remained his devotees even when his passion had 
cooled to courtesy. Crassus, though his wife Tertulla was reported to be 
Caesar’s mistress, lent him vast sums to finance his candidacies with bribes 



CAESAR 


CHAP. IX) 


169 


and games; at one time Caesar owed him 800 talents ($2,880,000). Such 
loans were not acts of generosity or friendship; they were campaign con- 
tributions, to be repaid with political favors or military spoils. Crassus, like 
Atticus, needed protection and opportunities for his millions. Most Roman 
politicians of the time incurred similar “debts”; Mark Antony owed 40,000,- 
000 sesterces, Cicero 60,000,000, Milo 70,000,000— though these figures may 
be conservative slanders. We must think of Caesar as at first an unscrupulous 
politician and a reckless rake, slowly transformed by growth and respon- 
sibility into one of history’s most profound and conscientious statesmen. 
We must not forget, as we rejoice at his faults, that he was a great man not- 
withstanding. We cannot equate ourselves with Caesar by proving that he 
seduced women, bribed ward leaders, and wrote books. 


II. THE CONSUL 

Caesar began as the secret ally of Catiline and ended as the remaker of 
Rome. Hardly a year after Sulla’s death he prosecuted Gnaeus Dola- 
bella, a tool of the Sudan reaction; the jury voted against Caesar, but the 
people applauded his democratic offensive and his brilliant speech. He could 
not rival Cicero’s verve and wit, passionate periods, and rhetorical flagella- 
tions; indeed, Caesar disliked this “Asianic” style and disciplined himself to 
the masculine brevity and stern simplicity that were to distinguish his Com- 
mentaries on the Gallic and Civil Wars. Nevertheless, he was soon ranked 
as second only to Cicero in eloquence.® 

In 68 he was chosen quaestor and was assigned to serve in Spain. He led 
military expeditions against the native tribes, sacked towns, and collected 
enough plunder to pay off some of his debts. At the same time he won the 
gratitude of Spanish cities by lowering the interest charges on the sums that 
had been lent them by the Roman bankers. Coming at Gades upon a statue 
of Alexander, he reproached himself for having accomplished so little at 
an age when the Macedonian had conquered half the Mediterranean world. 
He returned to Rome and plunged again into the race for office and power. 
In 65 he was elected aedile, or commissioner of public works. He spent his 
money— i.e., the money of Crassus— in adorning the Forum with new build- 
ings and colonnades, and courted the populace with unstinted games. Sulla 
had removed from the Capitol the trophies of Marius— banners, pictures, 
and spoils representing the features and victories of the old radical; Caesar 
had these restored, to the joy of Marius’ veterans; and by that act alone he 
announced his rebel policy. The conservatives protested and marked him 
out as a man to be broken. 



170 CAESAR AND CHRIST (CHAP. IX 

In 64, as president of a commission appointed to try cases of murder, he 
summoned to his tribunal the surviving agents of Sulla’s proscriptions and 
sentenced several of them to exile or death. In 63 he voted in the Senate 
against the execution of Catiline’s accomphces and remarked casually, in his 
speech, that human personality does not outlive death it was apparently 
the only part of his speech that offended no one. In that same year he was 
elected pontifex maxmms, head of the Roman religion. In 62 he was chosen 
praetor, and prosecuted a leading conservative for embezzling public funds. 
In 6 1 he was appointed propraetor for Spain, but his creditors prevented his 
departure. He admitted that he needed 25,000,000 sesterces in order to have 
nothing.® Crassus came to his rescue by underwriting all his obligations. 
Caesar proceeded to Spain, led militarily brilliant campaigns against tribes 
with a passion for independence, and came back to Rome with spoils enough 
to pay off his debts and yet so enrich the Treasury that the Senate voted him 
a triumph. Perhaps the optimates were subtle; they knew that Caesar wished 
to stand for the consulate, that the law forbade candidacy in absence, and 
that the triumphator was required by law to remain outside the city until 
the day of his triumph— which the Senate had set for after the election. But 
Caesar forewent his triumph, entered the city, and campaigned with irre- 
sistible energy and skill. 

His victory was obtained by his clever attachment of Pompey to the 
liberal cause. Pompey had just returned from the East after a succession of 
military and diplomatic achievements. By clearing the sea of pirates he had 
restored security to Mediterranean trade, and prosperity to the cities it 
served. He had pleased the capitalists of Rome by conquering Bithynia, 
Pontus, and Syria; he had deposed and set up kings and had lent them money 
from his spoils at lush rates of interest; he had accepted a huge bribe from 
the king of Egypt to come and quell a revolt there, and then had refrained 
from carrying out the compact on the ground that it was illegal;® he had 
pacified Palestine and made it a client state of Rome; he had founded thirty- 
nine cities and had established law, order, and peace; all in all he had behaved 
with judgment, statesmanship, and profit. Now he had brought back to 
Rome such wealth in taxes and tribute, goods captured and slaves ransomed 
or sold, that he was able to contribute 200,000,000 sesterces to the Treasury, 
add 350,000,000 to its annual revenues, distribute 384,000,000 among his 
soldiers, and yet keep enough for himself to rival Crassus as one of the two 
richest men in Rome. 

The Senate was more frightened than pleased at these accomplishments. 
It trembled when it heard that Pompey had landed at Brundisium (62 ) with 
an army personally devoted to him and capable at his word of making him 
dictator. He magnanimously relieved its fears by disbanding his troops and 



CAESAR 


CHAP. IX) 


I7I 


entering Rome with no other retinue than his personal staff. His triumph 
lasted two days, but even that time proved insufficient for all the floats that 
pictured his victories and displayed his gamerings. The imgrateful Senate 
rejected his request that state lands be given his soldiers, refused to ratify 
his agreements with conquered kings, and restored those arrangements that 
LucuUus had made in the East and which Pompey had ignored. The effect 
of these actions was to break down Cicero’s concordia ordimm, or alliance 
of the higher classes, and throw Pompey and the capitalists into a flirtation 
with the popidares. Taking full advantage of the situation, Caesar formed 
with Pompey and Crassus the First Triumvirate (60) , by which each pledged 
himself to oppose legislation unsatisfactory to any one of them. Pompey 
agreed to support Caesar for the consulate, and Caesar promised, if elected, 
to carry through the measures in which Pompey had been rebuffed by the 
Senate. 

The campaign was bitter, and bribery flourished on both sides. When 
Cato, leader of the conservatives, heard that his party was buying votes, he 
unbent and approved the procedure as in a noble cause. The populares 
elected Caesar, the opthmtes Bibulus. Caesar had hardly entered upon his 
consulate (59) when he proposed to the Senate the measures asked for by 
Pompey: a distribution of land to 20,000 of the poorer citizens, including 
Pompey’s soldiers; the ratification of Pompey’s arrangements in the East; 
and a one-third reduction of the sum which the publicans had pledged them- 
selves to raise from the Asiatic provinces. As the Senate opposed each of 
these measures by every means, Caesar, like the Gracchi, offered them di- 
rectly to the Assembly. The conservatives induced Bibulus to use his veto 
power to forbid a vote, and had omens declared unfavorable. Caesar ignored 
the omens and persuaded the Assembly to impeach Bibulus; and an enthusi- 
astic popularis emptied a pot of ordure upon Bibulus’ head. Caesar’s bills 
were carried. As in the case of the Gracchi, they combined an agrarian policy 
with a financial program pleasing to the business class. Pompey was im- 
pressed by Caesar’s performance of his pledges. He took Caesar’s daughter 
Julia as his fourth wife, and the entente between plebs and bourgeoisie 
became a feast of love. The Triumvirs promised the radical wing of their 
following that they would support Publius Clodius for the tribunate in the 
fall of 59. Meanwhile they kept the voters in good humor with profuse 
amusements and games. 

In April Caesar submitted his second land bill, by which the areas owned 
by the state in Campania were to be distributed among poor citizens who 
had three children. The Senate was again ignored, the Assembly passed the 
bill, and, after a century of effort, the Gracchan policy triumphed. Bibulus 
kept to his house and contented himself with periodical announcements that 



172 - 


CAESAR AND CHRIST 


(chap. IX 

the omens were unpropitious to legislation. Caesar administered public affairs 
without consulting him, so that the town wits referred to the year as “the 
consulate of Julius and Caesar.” To bring the Senate under public scrutiny, 
he established the first newspaper by having clerks make a record of Sena- 
torial and other public proceedings and news, and post these Acta Diurna, 
or “Daily Doings,” on the walls of the forums. From these walls the reports 
were copied and sent by private messengers to all parts of the Empire.^® 
Toward the end of this historic consulate Caesar had himself appointed 
governor of Cisalpine and Narbonese Gaul for the ensuing five years. As 
no troops could lawfully be stationed in Italy, the command over the legions 
stationed in north Italy gave its possessor military power over the whole 
peninsula. To guarantee the maintenance of his legislation, Caesar secured 
the election of his friends Gabinius and Piso as consuls for 58 and married 
Piso’s daughter Calpurnia. To ensure continued support from the plebs he 
lent his decisive aid to the election of Clodius as tribune for 58. He did not 
let his plans be influenced by the fact that he had recently divorced his third 
wife, Pompeia, on suspicion of adultery with Clodius. 


III. MORALS AND POLITICS 

Publius Clodius Pulcher (the Handsome) was a scion of the Claudian 
gens, a young aristocrat whose courage knew no fear and his morals no 
restraint. Like Catiline and Caesar he descended from his rank to lead the 
poor against the rich. To be eligible as a tribune of the people he had himself 
adopted into a plebeian family. To redistribute the concentrated wealth of 
Rome and to destroy Cicero— who had abused his sisterClodia and stood for 
the sanctity of property— he*served as a subaltern to Caesar until he could 
take power into his own hands. He admired Caesar’s policies and loved 
Caesar’s wife. To gain access to her he disguised himself as a woman, entered 
the house of Caesar, then (62) high priest, took part in the ceremonies of- 
fered by women alone to the Bona Dea, was detected, accused, and publicly 
tried (61) for having violated the mysteries of the Good Goddess. Caesar, 
called as a witness, said that he had no charge to make against Clodius. Why, 
then, asked the prosecutor, had he divorced Pompeia? “Because,” said 
Caesar, “my wife must be above suspicion.” It was a clever answer, which 
neither exonerated nor condemned a valuable political aide. Various wit- 
nesses-perhaps bribed-told the court that Clodius had had relations with 
Clodia and had seduced his sister Tertia after her marriage to Lucullus. 
Clodius protested that he had been away from Rome on the day of the 
alleged sacrilege; Cicero, however, testified that Clodius had on that day 



CAESAR 


173 


CHAP. DC) 

been with him in Rome. The populace thought the whole affair a Senatorial 
plot to destroy a populares leader and cried out for acquittal. Crassus— 
some say at Caesar’s behest— bribed a number of judges for Clodius. The 
radicals for once had the more money, and Clodius was freed. Caesar took 
advantage of the situation to exchange an inconveniently conservative wife 
for the daughter of a senator allied to the popular cause. 

He had hardly retired from office when some conservatives proposed 
the complete annulment of his legislation. Cato did not conceal his opinion 
that these “Julian laws” should be wiped off the statute books. The Senate 
hesitated to fling so open a challenge to Caesar armed with legions and to 
Clodius wielding the tribunate. In 63 Cato had wooed the populace for 
the conservatives by renewing the state distribution of cheap com; now 
(58) Clodius countered by making the dole completely free to all who came 
for it. He passed bills through the Assembly forbidding the use of religious 
vetoes against legislative procedures and restoring the legality of the collegia, 
which the Senate had tried to disband. He reorganized these guilds into 
voting blocs and won such fealty from them that they provided him with 
an armed guard. Fearing that after his year as tribune had expired Cato or 
Cicero might attempt to undo Caesar’s work, Clodius persuaded the As- 
sembly to send Cato as commissioner to Cyprus, and to pass a decree banish- 
ing any man who had put Roman citizens to death without securing, as law 
required, the Assembly’s consent. Cicero saw that the measure was aimed 
at him and fled to Greece, where cities and dignitaries rivaled one another 
in offering him hospitality and honors. The Assembly decreed that Cicero’s 
property should be confiscated, and his house on the Palatine was razed to 
the ground. 

It was Cicero’s good fortune that Qodius, overcome with success, now 
attacked both Pompey and Caesar, and planned to make himself sole leader 
of the plebs. Pompey retaliated by supporting the petition of Cicero’s brother 
Quintus for the orator’s recall. The Senate appealed to all Roman citizens 
in Italy to come to the capital and vote on the proposal. Clodius brought 
an armed gang into the Field of Mars to supervise the balloting, and Pompey 
engaged a needy aristocrat, Annius Milo, to organize a rival band. Riot and 
bloodshed ensued, many men were killed, and Quintus barely escaped with 
his life. But his measure carried, and after months of exile Cicero returned 
in triumph to Italy (57). Multitudes greeted him as he passed from Brun- 
disium to Rome; there the welcoming crowd was so great that Cicero feigned 
fear that he would be accused of having contrived his banishment for the 
sake of this glorious restoration.^^ 

Apparently hchad pledged himself to Pompey, and perhaps to Caesar, as 
the price of his recall. Caesar lent him large sums to recoup his finances and 



CAESAR AND CHRIST 


174 


(chap. IX 


refused to take interest.^^ For several years now Cicero became the advocate 
of the Triumvirs in the Senate. When a dearth of grain threatened Rome 
(57), he secured for Pompey an extraordinary commission with full power 
for six years over all the food supply of Rome and over all ports and trade. 
Pompey again acquitted himself well, but the constitution of the Republic 
suffered another blow, and government by men continued to replace gov- 
ernment by laws. In 56 Cicero persuaded the Senate to vote a substantial 
amount for the payment of Caesar’s troops in Gaul. In 54 he unsuccessfully 
defended the extortionate provincial administration of Aulus Gabinius, a 
friend of the Triumvirs. In 55 he canceled all the favor he had gained with 
Caesar by an abusive attack upon another provincial governor, Calpurnius 
Piso. He remembered too vividly that Piso had voted for his banishment; 
he forgot that Piso’s daughter was Caesar’s wife. 

Upon Cato’s return (57) from his brilliant reorganization of Cyprian 
affairs, the conservatives re-formed their lines. Clodius, now the enemy of 
Pompey, accepted the invitation of the aristocracy to lend it the assistance 
of his popularity and his thugs. Literature took on an anti-Caesarian tint; 
the epigrams of Calvus and Catullus flew like poisoned darts into the camp 
of the Triumvirs. As Caesar moved farther and farther into Gaul, and news 
came of the many dangers that he faced, hope sprung anew in noble breasts; 
after all, said Cicero, there are many ways in which a man may die. If we 
may believe Caesar, several conservatives opened negotiations with Ario- 
vistus, the German leader, for the assassination of Caesar.^® Domitius, run- 
ning for the consulate, announced that if elected he would at once move 
for Caesar’s recall— which meant Caesar’s indictment and trial. Veering with 
the wind, Cicero proposed that on May 25, 56, the Senate should consider 
the abrogation of Caesar’s land laws. 


rv. THE CONQUEST OF GAUL 

In the spring of 58 Caesar took up his duties as governor of Cisalpine and 
Narbonese Gaul— i.e., northern Italy and southern France. In 7 1 Ariovistus 
had led 15,000 Germans into Gaul at the request of one Gallic tribe seeking 
assistance against another. He had provided the desired aid and then had 
remained to establish his rule over all the tribes of northeastern Gaul. One 
of these, the Aedui, appealed to Rome for help against the Germans (61); 
the Senate authorized the Roman governor of Narbonese Gaul to comply, 
but almost at the same time it listed Ariovistus among rulers friendly to 
Rome. Meanwhile 120,000 Germans crossed the Rhine, settled in Flanders, 
and so strengthened Ariovistus that he treated the native population as sub- 



CAESAR 


175 


CHAP. IX) 

ject peoples and dreamed of conquering all Gaul.^* At the same time the 
Helvetii, centering about Geneva, began migrating westward, 368,000 
strong, and Caesar was warned that they planned to cross his province of 
Narbonese Gaul on their way to southwestern France. “From the sources 
of the Rhine to the Atlantic Ocean,” says Mommsen, “the German tribes 
were in motion; the whole line of the Rhine was threatened by them; it was 
a movement like that when the Alemanni and the Franks threw themselves 
upon the falling empire of the Caesars . . . five hundred years afterward.”^® 
While Rome plotted against him, Caesar plotted to save Rome. 

At his own expense, and without the authority he should have sought 
from the Senate, he raised and equipped four extra legions besides the four 
already provided him. He sent a peremptory invitation to Ariovistus to 
come and discuss the situation; as he had expected, Ariovistus refused. Depu- 
tations came now to Caesar from many Galhc tribes, asking for his pro- 
tection. Caesar declared war against both Ariovistus and the Helvetii, 
marched northward, and met the Helvetian avalanche in a bloody battle at 
Bibracte, capital of the Aedui, near the modern Autun. Caesar’s legions won, 
but by a narrow margin; in these matters we must for the most part follow 
his own account. The Helvetii olfered to return to their Swiss homeland; 
Caesar agreed to give them safe passage, but on condition that their territory 
should accept the rule of Rome. All Gaul now sent him thanks for its deliv- 
erance, and begged his aid in expelling Ariovistus. He met the Germans near 
Ostheim,* and slew or captured (he tells us) nearly all of them (58). Ario- 
vistus escaped, but died soon afterward. 

Caesar took it for granted that his liberation of Gaul was also a conquest 
of it: he began at once to reorganize it under Roman authority, with the 
excuse that in no other way could it be protected against Germany. Some 
Gauls, unconvinced, rebelled, and invoked the aid of the Belgae, a powerful 
tribe of Germans and Celts inhabiting north Gaul between the Seine and 
the Rhine. Caesar defeated their army on the banks of the Aisne; then, with 
a celerity of movement that never allowed his foes to unite, he moved in 
succession against the Suessiones, Ambiani, Nervii, and Aduatici, conquered 
them, despoiled them, and sold the captives to the slave merchants of Italy. 
Somewhat prematurely he announced the conquest of Gaul; the Senate 
proclaimed it a Roman province (56), and the common people of Rome, 
as imperialistic as any general, shouted the praises of their distant champion. 
Caesar recrossed the Alps into Cisalpine Gaul, busied himself with its internal 
administration, replenished his legions, and invited Pompey and Crassus to 
meet him at Luca to plan a united defense against the conservative reaction. 


* Ten miles west of the Rhine, 160 miles south of Cologne. 



CAESAR AND CHRIST 


176 


(chap. IX 


T o forestall Domitius they agreed that Pompey and Crassus should run 
against him for the consulate for 55 b.c.; that Pompey should be made gov- 
ernor of Spain, and Crassus of Syria, for five years (54-50); that Caesar 
should be continued for another five years (53-49) as governor of Gaul; 
and that at the end of this term he should be allowed to seek a second con- 
sulate. He furnished his colleagues and friends, from the booty of Gaul, 
with funds to finance their campaigns; he sent great sums to Rome to provide 
work for the unemployed, commissions for his supporters, and prestige for 
himself, by an extensive program of public buildings; and he so oiled the 
palms of the senators who came to sample his loot that the movement to 
repeal his laws collapsed. Pompey and Crassus were elected consuls after 
the usual bribery, and Caesar returned to the task of persuading the Gauls 
that peace is sweeter than freedom. 

Trouble was brewing on the Rhine below Cologne. Two German tribes 
had crossed into Beigic Gaul as far as Liege, and the nationalist party in 
Gaul was seeking their help against the Romans. Caesar met the invaders 
near Xanten (55), drove them back to the Rhine, and slew such of them— 
women and children as well as men— as were not drowned in the river. His 
engineers then built in ten days a bridge over the great stream, there 1400 
feet wide; Caesar’s legions crossed, and fought long enough on German 
soil to establish the Rhine as a secure frontier. After two weeks he retraced 
his steps into Gaul. 

We do not know why he now invaded Britain. Possibly he was lured by 
rumors that gold or pearls abounded there; or he wished to capture the tin 
and iron deposits of Britain for Roman exportation; or he resented the aid 
that Britons had sent to the Gauls, and thought that Roman power in Gaul 
must be made secure in every direction. He led a small force across the 
Channel at its narrowest point, defeated the unprepared Britons, took a 
few notes, and returned (55). A year later he crossed again, overcame the 
British under Cassivelaunus, reached the Thames, exacted promise of tribute, 
and sailed back to Gaul. 

Perhaps he had heard that revolt was once more agitating the Gallic 
tribes. He suppressed the Eburones and marched again into Germany (53) . 
Returmng, he left his main army in northern Gaul, while with his remaining 
troops he went to winter in north Italy, hoping to devote a few months to 
mending his fences in Rome. But early in 52 word came to him that Ver- 
cingetorix, the ablest of the Gallic chieftains, had united nearly all the tribes 
in a war for independence. Caesar’s situation was precarious in the extreme. 
Most of his legions were in the north, and the country between them and 
himself was in rebel hands. He led a small detachment over the snow-covered 
Cevennes against Auvergne; when Vercingetorix brought up his forces to 



CAESAR 


CHAP, ix) 


177 


defend it, Caesar left Decimus Brutus in command and, with a few horse- 
men, rode in disguise across all Gaul from south-to north, rejoined his main 
army, and at once led them to the attack. He besieged, captured, and sacked 
Avaricum (Bourges) and Cenabum (Orleans), massacred their populations, 
and replenished his depleted supplies with their treasuries. He moved on to 
assail Gergovia; there, however, the Gauls resisted so resolutely that he was 
compelled to withdraw. The Aedui, whom he had rescued from the 
Germans, and who heretofore had remained his allies, now deserted him , 
captured his base and stores at Soissons, and prepared to drive him back into 
Narborffese Gaul. 

It was the lowest ebb of Caesar’s fortunes, and for a time he considered 
himself lost. He staked everything upon a siege of Alesia ( Alise Ste.-Reine) , 
where Vercingetorix had gathered 30,000 troops. Caesar had hardly dis- 
tributed a like number of soldiers around the city when word came that 
2 50,000 Gauls were marching down upon him from the north. He ordered 
his men to raise two concentric walls of earth around the city, one before 
them, the other behind them. Against these walls and the desperate Romans 
the armies of Vercingetorix and his allies threw themselves in repeated vain 
attacks. After a week the army of relief broke up in disorder for lack of 
discipline and supplies, and melted into ineffectual bands at the very moment 
when the Romans had reached the end of their stores. Soon thereafter the 
starving city sent Vercingetorix at his own suggestion as a prisoner to 
Caesar, and then surrendered to the Roman’s mercy (52). The town was 
spared, but all its soldiers were given to the legionaries as slaves, Vercinge- 
torix was led in chains to Rome; there he later graced Caesar’s triumph and 
paid with his life for his devotion to liberty. 

The siege of Alesia decided the fate of Gaul and the character of French 
civihzation. It added to the Roman Empire a country twice the size of Italy 
and opened the purses and markets of 5,000,000 people to Roman trade. It 
saved Italy and the Mediterranean world for four centuries from barbarian 
invasion; and it lifted Caesar from the verge of ruin to a new height of repu- 
tation, wealth, and power. After another year of sporadic revolts, wluch 
the angry general put down with uncharacteristic severity, aU Gaul accepted 
subjection to Rome. Once his victory was certain Caesar became again the 
generous conqueror; he treated the tribes with such lenience that in all the 
ensuing Civil War, when he and Rome would have been helpless to retahate, 
they made no move to throw off the yoke. For three hundred years Gaul 
remained a Roman province, prospered under the Roman peace, learned and 
transformed the Latin language, and became the channel through which 
the culture of classic antiquity passed into northern Europe. Doubtless 
neither Caesar nor his contemporaries foresaw the immense consequences 



CAESAR AND CHRIST 


178 


(chap. IX 


of his bloody triumph. He thought he had saved Italy, won a province, and 
forged an army; he did not suspect that he was the creator of French civih- 
zation. 

Rome, which had known Caesar only as a spendthrift, rake, politician, 
and reformer, was amazed to find him also a tireless administrator and a 
resourceful general. At the same time it discovered in him a major historian. 
In the midst of his campaigns, disturbed by the attacks upon him in Rome, 
he had recorded and defended his conquest of Gaul in Comvjentaries whose 
military conciseness and artful simplicity raised them, despite a thousand 
milia passuum, from a partisan pamphlet to a high place in Latin literature. 
Even Cicero, shifting again, sang a paean in his praise, and anticipated the 
verdict of histoiy: 

It is not the ramparts of the Alps, nor the foaming and flooding 
Rhine, but the arms and generalship of Caesar which I account our 
true shield and barrier against the invasion of the Gauls and the bar- 
barous tribes of Germany. It is to him we owe it that, should the 
mountains be leveled with the plain and the rivers be dried up, we 
should still hold our Italy fortified not by nature’s bulwarks but by 
the exploits and victories of Caesar.^® 

To which should be added the tribute of a great German: 

That there is a bridge connecting the past glory of Hellas and 
Rome with the prouder fabric of modem history, that western Europe 
is Romanic, and Germanic Europe classic ... all this is the work of 
Caesar; and while the creation of his great predecessor in the East has 
been almost wholly reduced to min by the tempests of the Middle 
Ages, the stracture of Caesar has outlasted those thousands of years 
which have changed religions and states.^^ 


V. THE DEGRADATION OF DEMOCRACY 

During the second quinquennium of Caesar in Gaul, Roman politics had 
become an unparalleled chaos of corruption and violence. Pompey and 
Crassus, as consuls, pursued their policies by the bribery of votes, the intimi- 
dation of juries, and occasional murder.^® When their year of office ended, 
Crassus recruited and conscripted a large army and sailed for Syria. He 
crossed the Euphrates and met the Parthians at Carrhae. Their superior 
cavalry defeated him, and his son fell in the battle. Crassus was withdrawing 
his forces in good order when the Parthian general invited him to a confer- 
ence. He went and w'as treacherously slain. His head was sent to play the 
part of Pentheus in a performance of Euripides’ Bacchae at the Parthian 



CAESAR 


179 


CHAP. IX) 

court; and his leaderless army, long wearied of the campaign, disappeared 
in a disorderly rout (53). 

Meanwhile Pompey too had levied an army, presumably to complete the 
conquest of Spain. Had Caesar’s plans matured, Pompey would have brought 
Farther Spain, and Crassus Armenia and Parthia, within the orbit of Roman 
power at the same time that Caesar was extending the frontier to the Thames 
and the Rhine. Instead of leading his legions to Spain, Pompey kept them 
in Italy, except for one which he lent to Caesar in the crisis of the Gallic 
revolt. In 54 the strongest tie that held him to Caesar was cut by the death 
of his wife Julia in childbirth. Caesar offered him his grandniece Octavia, 
now Caesar’s nearest female relative, and asked for the hand of Pompey’s 
daughter; but Pompey refused both proposals. The debacle of Crassus and 
his army in the following year removed another balancing force, for a vic- 
torious Crassus would have opposed the dictatorship of either Caesar or 
Pompey. Henceforth Pompey openly allied himself with the conservatives. 
His plan to secure supreme power through legal forms had now only one 
obstacle— the ambition and army of Caesar. Knowing that Caesar’s com- 
mand would expire in 49, Pompey secured decrees continuing his own 
command to the end of 46, and requiring all Italians capable of bearing arms 
to take an oath of military fealty to him personally; in this way, he trusted, 
time itself would make him master of Rome.^® 

While the potential dictators maneuvered for position, the capital filled 
with the odor of a dying democracy. Verdicts, offices, provinces, and client 
kings were sold to the highest bidders. In the year 53 the first voting division 
in the Assembly was paid 1 0,000,000 sesterces for its vote."® When money 
failed, murder was available; or a man’s past was raked over, and black- 
mail brought him to terms. Crime flourished in the city, brigandage in the 
country; no police force existed to control it. Rich men hired bands of 
gladiators to protect them, or to support them in the comitia. The lowest 
elements in Italy were attracted to Rome by the smell of money or the gift 
of corn, and made the meetings of the Assembly a desecration. Any man 
who would vote as paid was admitted to the rolls, whether citizen or not; 
sometimes only a minority of those who cast ballots were entitled to vote. 
The privilege of addressing the Assembly had on several occasions to be 
won by storming the rostrum and holding it by main force. Legislation 
came to be determined by the fluctuating superiority of rival gangs; those 
who voted the wrong way were, now and then, beaten to within an inch 
of their lives, after which their houses were set afire. Following one such 
meeting Cicero wrote: “The Tiber was full of the corpses of citizens, the 
public sewers were stuffed with them, and slaves had to mop up with 
sponges the blood that streamed from the Forum.” 



l8o CAESAR AND CHRIST (CHAP.IX 

Clodius and Milo were Rome’s most distinguished experts in this brand 
of parliament. They organized rival bands of ruffians for political purposes, 
and hardly a day passed without some test of their strength. One day 
Clodius assaulted Cicero in the street; another day his warriors burned down 
Milo’s house; at last Clodius himself was caught by Milo’s gang and killed 
(52). The proletariat, not privy to all his plots, honored Clodius as a martyr, 
gave him a mighty funeral, carried the body to the senate house, and burned 
the building over him as his funeral pyre. Pompey brought in his soldiers 
and dispersed the mob. As reward he asked from the Senate, and received, 
appointment as “consul without colleague,” a phrase that Cato recommended 
as more pleasant than “dictator.” Pompey then put through the Assembly- 
cowed by his troops— several measures aimed at political corruption, and 
another repealing the right (which his bill of 55 had granted to Caesar) to 
stand for the consulate while absent from Rome. He impartially supervised, 
with military force, the operation of the courts; Milo was tried for the 
murder of Clodius, was condemned despite Cicero’s defense,* and fled to 
Marseilles. Cicero went off to govern Cilicia (51), and acquitted himself 
there with a degree of competence and integrity which surprised and 
offended his friends. All the elements of wealth and order in the capital 
resigned themselves to the dictatorship of Pompey, while the poorer classes 
hopefully awaited the coming of Caesar. 


VI. CIVIL WAR 

A century of revolution had broken down a selfish and narrow aristoc- 
racy, but had put no other government in its place. Unemployment, bribery, 
bread and circuses had corrupted the Assembly into an ill-informed and 
passion-ridden mob obviously incapable of ruling itself, much less an empire. 
Democracy had fallen by Plato’s formula: liberty had become license, 
and chaos begged an end to liberty Caesar agreed with Pompey that the 
Republic was dead; it was now, he said, “a mere name, without body or 
form”;^® dictatorship was unavoidable. But he had hoped to establish a 
leadership that would be progressive, that would not freeze the status quo, 
but would lessen the abuses, inequities, and destitution which had degraded 
democracy. He was now fifty-four, and surely weakened by his long 
campaigns in Gaul; he did not relish a war against his fellow citizens and 

• The speech as it has come down to us was much revised. It differed so much from the 
actual address— w'hich had been confused by hostile disturbances— that when Milo read it he 
exclaimed: “O Cicero! If you had only spoken as you have written I should not now be 
eating the very excellent fish of Marseilles.” ^3 




CAESAR 


CHAP. IX) 


l8l 


his former friends. But he saw the snares that had been prepared for him, 
and resented them as an ill-reward for one who had saved Italy. His term 
as governor of Gaul would end on March i, 49; he could not run for the 
consulship until the fall of that year; in the interval he would lose the 
immunity of an officeholder, and could not enter Rome without subjecting 
himself to those proscriptions which were among the favorite weapons of 
party warfare in Rome. Already Marcus Marcellus had proposed to the 
Senate that Caesar should be deposed from his governorship before its expira- 
tion— which meant self-exile or trial. The tribunes of the plebs had saved 
him by their veto, but the Senate clearly favored the motion. Cato frankly 
expressed the hope that Caesar would be accused, tried, and banished from 
Italy. 

Caesar made every effort at conciliation. When, at Pompey’s suggestion, 
the Senate asked both generals to release to it a legion for use against Parthia, 
Caesar at once complied, though his force was small; and when Pompey 
asked Caesar for the return of the legion sent him a year before, Caesar dis- 
patched it to him without delay. His friends informed him, however, that 
instead of being sent to Parthia these legions were being kept at Capua. 
Through his supporters in the Senate Caesar requested a renewal of the 
Assembly’s earlier decree permitting him to stand for the consulship in 
absence. The Senate refused to submit the motion and demanded that Caesar 
dismiss his troops. Caesar felt that his legions were his only protection; per- 
haps he had nourished their personal loyalty with a view to just such a crisis 
as this. Nevertheless, he proposed to the Senate that both he and Pompey 
should lay down their commissions— an offer which seemed to the people 
of Rome so reasonable that they garlanded his messenger with flowers. The 
Senate favored the plan, 370 to 22, but Pompey balked at it. In the last days 
of the year 50 the Senate declared Caesar a public enemy unless he should 
abandon his command by July i. On the first day of 49 Curio read to the 
Senate a letter in which Caesar agreed to disband all but two of his ten 
legions if he might retain the governorship till 48; but he spoiled the offer 
by adding that he would look upon its rejection as a declaration of war. 
Cicero spoke for the proposal, and Pompey agreed to it; but the consul 
Lentulus intervened and drove Caesar’s lieutenants, Curio and Antony, from 
the senate house.-® After a long debate the reluctant Senate, persuaded by 
Lentulus, Cato, and Marcellus, gave Pompey orders and powers to “see 
that no harm should come to the state”— the Roman phrase for dictatorship 
and martial law. 

Caesar hesitated more than was his wont. Legally the Senate was right; 
he had no authority to name the conditions under which he would resign 
his command. He knew that civil war might bring Gaul to revolt and Italy 



i 82 CAESAR AND CHRIST (cHAP. IX 

to ruin. But to yield was to surrender the Empire to incompetence and 
reaction. Amid his deliberations he learned that one of his nearest friends 
and ablest lieutenants, Titus Labienus, had gone over to Pompey. He sum- 
moned the soldiers of his favorite Thirteenth Legion and laid the situation 
before them. His first word won them; Co 7 mnilitones!—'{tVLo\y soldiers.” 
They who had seen him share their hardships and perils, who had had to 
complain that he risked himself too readily, recognized his right to use this 
word; he had always addressed them so rather than with the curt Milites! 
of less gracious commanders. Most of his men came from Cisalpine Gaul, 
to which he had extended Roman citizenship; they knew that the Senate 
had refused to recognize this grant and that one senator had flogged a Cisal- 
pine Gaul just to show his contempt for Caesar’s enfranchisement; it was 
illegal to flog a Roman citizen. They had learned to respect Caesar— even, 
in their rough mute way, to love him— during their many campaigns. He 
had been severe with cowardice and indiscipline, but he had been lenient 
with their human faults, had winked at their sexual escapades, had spared 
them unnecessary dangers, had saved them by skillful generalship, had 
doubled their pay, and had spread his spoils among them handsomely. He 
told them of his proposals to the Senate and how these had been received; 
he reminded them that an idle and corrupt aristocracy was unfit to give 
Rome order, justice, and prosperity. Would they follow him? Not one 
refused. When he told them that he had no money with which to pay them 
they emptied their savings into his treasury. 

On January lo, 49, he led one legion across the Rubicon, a small stream, 
near Ariminum, that marked the southern boundary of Cisalpine Gaul. 
lacta est alea, he is reported to have said— “the die is cast.” It seemed an 
act of folly, for the remaining nine legions of his army were still distant in 
Gaul and could not reach him for weeks to come; while Pompey had ten 
legions, or 60,000 troops, authority to levy as many more as he pleased, and 
funds to arm and feed them. Caesar’s Twelfth Legion joined him at Picenum, 
the Eighth at Corfinium; he formed three legions more from prisoners, vol- 
unteers, and levies upon the population. He had little difficulty in getting 
recruits; Italy had not forgotten the Social War (88), and saw in Caesar a 
champion of Italian rights; one by one its cities opened their gates to him, 
some turned out en masse to welcome him; “the towns,” wrote Cicero, 
“salute him as a god.” Corfinium resisted briefly, then surrendered; Caesar 
protected it from sack by his soldiers, freed all captured officers, and sent 
to Pompey’s camp the money and baggage that Labienus had left behind. 
Though almost penniless, he refrained from confiscating those estates of his 
opponents that fell into his hands— a characteristically wise measure, which 
won to neutrality most of the middle class. It would be his policy, he 



CAESAR 


CHAP, rx) 


183 


announced, to consider all neutrals his friends. At every new advance he 
tried again for reconciliation. He sent a message to Lentulus begging him 
to use his consular influence for peace. In a letter to Cicero he offered to 
retire to private life and leave the field to Pompey, provided he should be 
allowed to live in security.®® Cicero labored to effect a compromise, but 
found his logic helpless before the rival dogmatisms of revolution.®^ 

Though his forces still far outnumbered Caesar’s, Pompey withdrew with 
them from the capital, and a disorderly stream of aristocrats followed him, 
leaving their wives and children to Caesar’s mercy. Rejecting every over- 
ture of peace, Pompey declared that he would consider as an enemy any 
senator who did not abandon Rome and join his camp. The majority of the 
Senate remained in Rome, and vacillating Cicero, despising Pompey’s vacil- 
lations, divided himself among his rural estates. Pompey marched to Brun- 
disium and ferried his troops across the Adriatic. He knew that his undis- 
ciplined army needed further training before it could stand up to Caesar’s 
legions; meanwhile, he hoped, the Roman fleet under his control would 
starve Italy into destroying his rival. 

Caesar entered Rome (March 16) unresisted and unarmed, having left 
his troops in near-by towns. He proclaimed a general amnesty and restored 
municipal administration and social order. The tribunes convoked the Sen- 
ate; Caesar asked it to name him dictator, but it refused; he asked it to 
send envoys to Pompey to negotiate peace, but it refused. He sought funds 
from the national Treasury; the tribune Lucius Metellus barred his way, 
but yielded when Caesar remarked that it was harder for him to utter 
threats than to execute them. Henceforth he made free use of the state’s 
money; but with unscrupulous impartiality he deposited in the Treasury 
the booty from his later campaigns. Then he returned to his soldiers, and 
prepared to meet the three armies that the Pompeians were organizing in 
Greece, Africa, and Spain. 

To secure the grain supply upon which Italy’s life depended, he sent the 
impetuous Curio with two legions to take Sicily. Cato surrendered the island 
and withdrew to Africa; Curio pursued him with the recklessness of Regu- 
lus, gave battle prematurely, was defeated, and died in action, mourning 
not his own death, but the injury he had done to Caesar. Meanwhile Caesar 
had led an army to Spain, partly to ensure the renewal of its grain exports 
to Italy, partly to forestall a rear attack when he marched to meet Pompey. 
In Spain, as in Gaul, he made serious blunders in strategy.®® For a time his 
outnumbered army faced starvation and defeat; but, as usual, he redeemed 
himself by brilliant improvisation and personal bravery.®® By altering the 
course of a river he turned blockade into counterblockade; he waited 
patiently for the entrapped army to surrender, though his troops fretted for 



184 CAESAR AND CHRIST (CHAP. IX 

action; at last the Pompeians gave in, and all Spain came over to Caesar 
(August, 49) . Returning toward Italy by land, he found his way blocked 
at Marseilles by an army under Lucius Domitius, whom he had captured and 
released at Corfinium. Caesar took the town after a hard siege, reorganized 
the administration of Gaul, and by December was back in Rome. 

His political position had been strengthened by this campaign, which 
had reassured the worried bellies of the capital. The Senate now named him 
dictator, but he surrendered that title after being elected one of the two 
consuls for 48. Finding Italy in a credit crisis due to the fact that the hoard- 
ing of currency had depressed prices, and debtors were refusing to pay in 
dear money what they had borrowed in cheap money, he decreed that debts 
might be paid in goods valued by state arbitrators at prewar prices; this, 
he thought, was “the most suitable way both of maintaining the honor of 
the debtors and of removing or diminishing the fear of that general repudia- 
tion of debts which is apt to follow war.” It is a revelation of how slowly 
reform had moved in Rome that he was compelled again to forbid enslave- 
ment for debt. He permitted the interest already paid on debts to be deducted 
from the principal, and limited interest to one per cent per month. These 
measures satisfied most creditors, who had feared confiscation; correspond- 
ingly they disappointed the radicals, who had hoped that Caesar would 
continue Catiline by abolishing all debts and redividing the land. He dis- 
tributed com to the needy, canceled all sentences of banishment except 
Milo’s, and pardoned all returning aristocrats. No one thanked him for his 
moderation. The forgiven conservatives resumed their plotting against his 
life; and while he was facing Pompey in Thessaly the radicals abandoned 
him for Caelius, who promised them a complete abolition of debts, the 
confiscation of large properties, and the reallotment of all land. 

Near the end of 49 Caesar joined the troops and fleet that his aides had 
collected at Brundisium. A winter crossing of the Adriatic by an army was 
in those days unheard of; the twelve vessels at his disposal could carry over 
only a third of his 60,000 men at one time; and Pompey’s superior squadrons 
patrolled all islands and harbors along the opposite coast. Nevertheless, 
Caesar set sail and crossed to Epirus with 20,000 men. On their way back 
to Italy his ships were wrecked. Wondering what delayed the remainder of 
his army, Caesar tried to recross in a small skiff. The sailors rowed out 
against the surf and were nearly dro^\^^ed. Caesar, dauntless amid their 
terror, encouraged them with the possibly legendary exhortation: “Fear 
not; you carry Caesar and his fortune.” But wind and wave tossed the 
boat back upon the shore, and Caesar had to abandon the attempt. Mean- 
while Pompey, with 40,000 men, seized Dyrrhachium and its rich stores; 
then, with the indecision that marked his obese years, he failed to attack 



CHAP. IX) CAESAR 185 

Caesar’s depleted and starving force. During this delay Mark Antony gath- 
ered another fleet and brought over the rest of Caesar’s army. 

Ready now to join battle, but still loath to turn Roman against Roman, 
Caesar sent an envoy to Pompey proposing that both leaders should lay 
down their commands. Pompey gave no reply.* Caesar attacked and was 
repulsed; but Pompey failed to follow his victory with pursuit. Ag ains t 
Pompey’s advice his officers put all captives to death, while Caesar spared 
his a contrast that raised the morale of Caesar’s troops and lowered that 
of Pompey’s. Caesar’s men begged him to punish them for the cowardice 
they had shown in this their first fight against Roman legions. When he 
refused, they besought him to lead them back to battle; but he thought it 
wiser to retreat into Thessaly and let them rest. 

Pompey now made the decision that cost him his life. Afranius advised 
him to return and recapture undefended Italy; but the majority of his coun- 
selors urged him to pursue and destroy Caesar. The aristocrats in Pompey’s 
camp exaggerated the victory at Dyrrhachium and supposed that the great 
issue had there been decided. Cicero, who had finally joined them, was 
shocked to hear them dispute as to their respective shares in the coming 
restoration, and to see with what luxury they lived in the midst of war— 
their meals served on silver plate, their tents comfortable with carpets, bril- 
liant with hangings, garlanded with flowers. 

Excepting Pompey himself [Cicero wrote], the Pompeians carried 
on the war with such rapacity, and breathed such principles of cruelty 
in their conversation, that I could not contemplate even their success 
without horror. . , . There was nothing good among them but their 
cause. ... A proscription was proposed not only individually but 
collectively. . . . Lentulus had promised himself Hortensius’ house, 
Caesar’s gardens, and Baiae.^® 

Pompey would have preferred a more Fabian strategy, but taunts of cow- 
ardice prevailed upon him, and he gave orders to march. 

At Pharsalus, August 9, 48, the decisive battle was fought to the bitter 
end. Pompey had 48,000 infantry, 7000 horse; Caesar had 22,000 and looo.®® 
“Some few of the noblest Romans,” says Plutarch, “standing as spectators 
outside the battle . . . could not but reflect to what a pass private ambition 
had brought the Empire. . . . The whole flower and strength of the same 
city, meeting here in collision with itself, offered plain proof how blind and 
mad a thing human nature is when passion is aroused” Near relatives, 
even brothers, fought in the opposed armies. Caesar bade his men spare all 
Romans who should surrender; as to the young aristocrat Marcus Brutus, 

* Our only authority for this embassy is Caesar.^® 



CAESAR AND CHRIST 


1 86 


(chap. DC 


he said, they were to capture him without injuring him, or, if this proved 
impossible, they were to let him escape.^^ The Pompeians were overwhelmed 
by superior leadership, training, and morale; 15,000 of them were killed or 
wounded, 20,000 surrendered, the remainder fled. Pompey tore the insignia 
of command from his clothing and took flight like the rest. Caesar tells us 
that he lost but 200 men which casts doubt upon all his books. His army 
was amused to see the tents of the defeated so elegantly adorned, and their 
tables laden with the feast that was to celebrate their victory. Caesar ate 
Pompey’s supper in Pompey’s tent. 

Pompey rode all night to Larissa, thence to the sea, and took ship to 
Alexandria. At Mytilene, where his wife joined him, the citizens wished 
him to stay; he refused courteously, and advised them to submit to the con- 
queror without fear, for, he said, “Caesar was a man of great goodness and 
clemency.” Brutus also escaped to Larissa, but there he dallied and wrote 
to Caesar. The victor expressed great joy on hearing that he was safe, 
readily forgave him, and at his request forgave Cassius. To the nations of 
the East, which— controlled by the upper classes— had supported Pompey, 
he was likewise lenient.. He distributed Pompey’s hoards of grain among the 
starving population of Greece, and to the Athenians asking pardon he replied 
with a smile of reproof: “How often will the glory of your ancestors save 
you from self-destruction?” ** 

Probably he had been warned that Pompey hoped to resume the contest 
with the army and resources of Egypt, and the forces that Cato, Labienus, 
and Metellus Scipio were organizing at Utica. But when Pompey reached 
Alexandria, Pothinus, eunuch vizier of young Ptolemy XII, ordered his 
servants to kill Pompey, presumably in expectation of reward from Caesar. 
The general was stabbed to death as he stepped upon the shore, while his 
wife looked on in helpless terror from the ship in which they had come. 
When Caesar arrived, Pothinus’ men presented him with the severed head. 
Caesar turned away in horror arfd wept at this new proof that by diverse 
means men come to the same end. He established his quarters in the royal 
palace of the Ptolemies and set himself to regulate the affairs of the ancient 
kingdom. 


VII. CAESAR AND CLEOPATRA 

Since the death of Ptolemy VI (145) Eg)q)t had rapidly decayed. Her 
kings were no longer able to maintain social order or national freedom; the 
Roman Senate increasingly dictated their policy, and garrisoned Alexandria 
with Roman troops. By the will of Ptolemy XI, whom Pompey and Gabinius 
had established on the throne, the government had descended to his son 



CHAP. IX) CAESAR 187 

Ptolemy XII and his daughter Cleopatra, who were to marry each other 
and reign together. 

Cleopatra was a Macedonian Greek by origin, and more probably blonde 
than brunette.^® She was not particularly beautiful; but the grace of her 
carriage, the vivacity of her body and her mind, the variety of her accom- 
plishments, the suavity of her manners, the very melody of her voice, com- 
bined with her royal position to make her a heady wine even for a Roman 
general. She was acquainted with Greek history, hterature, and philosophy; 
she spoke Greek, Egyptian, Syrian, and allegedly other languages, well; she 
added the intellectual fascination of an Aspasia to the seductive abandon 
of a completely uninhibited woman. Tradition credits her with a treatise 
on cosmetics and another on the alluring subject of Egyptian measures, 
weights, and coins.^® She was an able ruler and administrator, effectively 
promoted Egyptian commerce and industry, and was a competent financier 
even when making love. With these qualities went an Oriental sensuahty, an 
impetuous brutality that dealt out suffering and death, and a political ambi- 
tion that dreamed of empire and honored no code but success. If she had 
not borne the intemperate blood of the later Ptolemies in her veins she 
might have achieved her purpose of being the queen of a unified Mediter- 
ranean realm. She saw that Egypt could no longer be independent of Rome 
and knew no reason why she should not dominate their union. 

Caesar was not pleased to learn that Pothinus had banished Cleopatra and 
now ruled as regent for young Ptolemy. Secretly he sent for her, and secretly 
she came. To reach him she had herself concealed in some bedding which 
her attendant Apollodorus carried into Caesar’s apartment. The amazed 
Roman, who never let his victories in the field outnumber his conquests in 
love, was captivated by her courage and wit. He reconciled her with Ptolemy, 
and re-established her with her brother on the throne of Egypt. Learning 
from his barber that Pothinus and the Egyptian general Achillas were plot- 
ting to kill him and slaughter the small force that he had brought with him, 
he delicately arranged the assassination of Pothinus. Achillas escaped to the 
Egyptian army and roused it to insurrection; soon all Alexandria was alive 
with soldiers vowing death to Caesar. The Roman garrison which had been 
stationed in the city by the Senate was inspired by its officers to join in 
rising against this treasonable interloper who presumed to settle the suc- 
cession to the throne of the Ptolemies, and even to beget an heir for its future. 

In this emergency Caesar acted with his customary resourcefulness. He 
turned the royal palace and the near-by theater into fortresses for himself 
and his men, and sent for reinforcements from Asia Minor, Syria, and 
Rhodes. W’hen he saw that his defenseless fleet would soon fall into the 
hands of his enemies, he ordered it burned; in the fire an uncertain portion 



CAESAR AND CHRIST 


1 88 


(chap. IX 


of the Alexandrian library was consumed. By desperate sallies he captured, 
lost, and recaptured the island of Pharos, as being essential to the entry of 
the relief he awaited; in one of these engagements he swam for his hfe, amid 
a storm of arrows, when the Egyptians drove him and 400 of his men off 
the connecting mole into the sea. Thinking the rebels victorious, Ptolemy 
XII left the royal palace, joined them, and disappeared from history. When 
reinforcements arrived, Caesar routed the Egyptians and the Senatorial garri- 
son in the Battle of the Nile. He rewarded Cleopatra for her fidelity to him 
in this crisis by making her younger brother Ptolemy XIII coregent with her, 
which left her in effect the supreme ruler of Egypt. 

It is hard to understand why Caesar remained nine months in Alexandria 
while hostile armies were being organized against him near Utica, and while 
Rome, stifred to radical revolt by Caelius and Milo, longed for his fine 
administrative hand. Perhaps he felt that he deserved a little rest and play 
after ten years of war. He “often feasted with Cleopatra till daybreak,” says 
Suetonius, “and would have gone through Egypt with her in her royal 
barge almost to Ethiopia, had not his soldiers threatened mutiny”; they 
had not all found queans. Perhaps he gallantly waited to share the pains of 
her confinement. A child was bom to her in 47 and was named Caesarion; 
according to Mark Antony, Caesar acknowledged the boy as his son.^® It is 
not impossible that she whispered to him the pleasant thought of making 
himself king, marrying her, and uniting the Alediterranean world under 
one bed. 

This, however, is conjectural as well as scandalous; nothing but circum- 
stantial evidence supports it. Certainly Caesar flew to action when he learned 
that Phamaces, son of Mithridates, had recaptured Pontus, Lesser Armenia, 
and Cappadocia, and was inviting the East to rise once more against divided 
Rome. His wisdom in “pacifying” Spain and Gaul before meeting Pompey 
was now apparent; had the West revolted at one time with the East the 
Empire would probably have broken up, the “barbarians” would have 
moved southward, and Rome might never have known an Augustan age. 
Re-forming his three legions, Caesar set out in June of 47, marched with 
characteristic speed along the coast of Egypt through Syria and Asia Minor 
into Pontus, defeated Phamaces at Zela (August 2), and sent to a friend 
at Rome the laconic report, V em, vidi, vici—'l came, I saw, I conquered.” 

At Tarentum (September 26) he was met by Cicero, who asked forgive- 
ness for himself and other conservatives. Caesar consented amiably. He was 
shocked to find that during his twenty months’ absence from Rome the 
Civil War had become a social revolution: that Cicero’s son-in-law Dola- 
bella had joined forces with Caehus, and had proposed to the Assembly a bill 
canceling all debts; that Antony had let loose his soldiers upon Dolabella’s 



CAESAR 


CHAP. IX ) 


189 


armed proletaires, and 800 Romans had been killed in the Forum. Caelius, 
as praetor, had recalled Milo; together they had organized an army in 
southern Italy and had invited the slaves to unite with them in a thorough- 
going revolution. They had met with small success, but their spirit was in 
the air. At Rome the radicals were celebrating the memory of Catiline and 
again garlanding his tomb. Meanwhile the Pompeian army in Africa had 
grown as large as the one that had been beaten at Pharsalus. Pompey’s son 
Sextus had organized a new army in Spain, and the grain supply of Italy 
was once more hanging in the balance. Such was the situation in October, 
47, when Caesar reached Rome and Calpumia, bringing with him Cleopatra, 
her boy husband-brother, and Caesarion. 

In the few months permitted him beuveen campaigns he set about restor- 
ing order. Having been reappointed dictator, he appeased the radicals for 
a moment by repealing the last of Sulla’s laws and canceling for a year all 
rents below 2000 sesterces in Rome; at the same time he tried to comfort 
the conservatives by making Marcus Brutus governor of Cisalpine Gaul, 
assuring Cicero and Atticus that he would abet no war against property, 
and ordering the re-erection of the statues of Sulla, which the proletaires 
had knocked down. When he turned his thoughts to the Pompeians he was 
discouraged to hear th^t his most trusted legions were in revolt because of 
long-overdue pay and were refusing to embark for Africa. As the Treasury 
was nearly empty, he raised funds by confiscating and selling the property 
of rebel aristocrats; he had learned, he said, that soldiers depend upon 
money, money upon power, and power upon soldiers.®® He suddenly ap- 
peared among the rebellious legions, called them together, and quietly told 
them that they were released from service and might go to their homes; he 
added that he would make up all arrears to them when he had triumphed 
in Africa “with other soldiers.” “At this expression,” says Appian, “shame 
seized upon them all, that they were abandoning their commander in this 
moment when enemies surrounded him on every side. . . . They cried 
out that they repented of their revolt, and besought him to keep them in 
his service.” He yielded with charming reluctance, and sailed with them 
for Africa. 

At Thapsus, on April 6, 46, he met the combined forces of Metellus 
Scipio, Cato, Labienus, and Juba I, the Numidian king. Again he lost the 
first encounter; again he re-formed his fines, attacked, and won. His blood- 
crazed soldiers, blaming his clemency at Pharsalus for having to fight this 
second battle, slaughtered 10,000 of the 80,000 Pompeians, giving no quarter; 
they did not propose to meet these men again. Juba committed suicide; 
Scipio fled and died in an engagement at sea; Cato with a small division 
escaped to Utica. When the ofiicers wished to defend the city against 



CAESAR AND CHRIST 


190 


(chap. DC 


Caesar, Cato persuaded them that it was impossible. He provided funds for 
those who planned flight, but advised his son to submit to Caesar. He himself 
rejected both courses. He spent the evening in philosophical discussion; 
then he retired to his room and read Plato’s Pbaedo. Suspecting that he would 
kill himself, his friends took his sword from his bedside. When they had 
relaxed their vigil he compelled his servant to bring back the weapon. For 
a while he feigned sleep; then suddenly he took the sword and plunged it 
into his abdomen. His friends rushed in; a physician put back the extruding 
intestines and sewed and bandaged the wound. As soon as they had left the 
room Cato removed the bandage, tore open the wound, pulled out his 
entrails, and died. 

When Caesar came he mourned that he had no chance to pardon Cato; 
he could only pardon the son. The Uticans gave the dead Stoic a magnificent 
funeral, as if knowing that they MTre burying a republic almost five cen- 
turies old. 


VIII. THE STATESMAN 

After appointing Sallust governor of Numidia, and reorganizing the 
provinces of Africa, Caesar in the fall of 46 returned to Rome. The fright- 
ened Senate, recognizing the advent of monarchy, voted him the dictatorship 
for ten years, and such a triumph as Rome had never seen before. He paid 
each of his soldiers 5000 Attic drachmas ($3000), much more than he had 
promised them. He feasted the citizens at 22,000 tables, and for their amuse- 
ment provided a sham sea battle involving 1 0,000 men. Early in 45 he left 
for Spain, and at Munda defeated the last Pompeian army. When, in October, 
he reached Rome, he found all Italy in chaos. Oligarchic misrule and a 
century of revolution had disordered agriculture, industry, finance, and 
trade. The exhaustion of the provinces, the hoarding of capital, and the 
precariousness of investment had disturbed the flow of money. Thousands 
of estates had fallen into ruin; 100,000 men had been drawn from production 
into war; peasants beyond number had been driven by the competition of 
foreign grain or latiftmdia slaves to join the proletariat in the towns and 
listen hungrily to promising demagogues. The surviving aristocracy, un- 
melted by Caesar’s clemency, plotted against him in their clubs and palaces. 
He appefied to them in the Senate to recognize the necessity of dictatorship, 
and to co-operate with him in a healing reconstruction. They scorned the 
advances of the usurper, denounced the presence of Cleopatra as his guest 
in Rome, and whispered that he was planning to make himself king and move 
the seat of the Empire to Alexandria or Ilium. 

Caesar alone, therefore, though prematurely old at fifty-five, set himself 



CAESAR 


CHAP. IX) 


I9I 


with Roman energy to remake the Roman state. He knew that his victories 
would be meaningless if he could not build something better than the 
wreckage that he had cleared away. When, in 44, his dictatorship for ten 
years was extended for life, he did not much exaggerate the difference, 
though he could hardly foresee that in five months he would be dead. The 
Senate heaped adulation and titles upon him, perhaps to make him odious 
to a people that hated the very name of king. It let him wear the laurel 
wreath, with which he hid his baldness, and carry even in peace the 
imperator’s powers. Through these he controlled the Treasury, and as 
p 07 itifex max'mms, the priesthoods; as consul he could propose and execute 
laws; as tribune his person was inviolable; as censor he could make or unmake 
senators. The assemblies kept the right to vote on proposed measures, but 
Caesar’s lieutenants, Dolabella and Antony, managed the assemblies, which 
in general favored his policies. Like other dictators he sought to base his 
power upon popularity with the people. 

He subordinated the Senate almost to the role of an advisory council. 
He enlarged it from 600 to 900 members and permanently transformed it 
with 400 new appointees. Many of these were Roman businessmen; many 
were leading citizens of Italian or provincial cities; some had been cen- 
turions, soldiers, or sons of slaves. The patricians were alarmed to see the 
chieftains of conquered Gaul enter the Senate and join the rulers of the 
Empire; even the wags of the capital resented this and circulated a 'satiric 
couplet: 

Gallos Caesar in trhmiphiim dncit, idem in curiam; 

Gain brace as deposuerimt, latum clavum simipserunt— 

“Caesar leads Gauls in his triumph, then into the Senate; the Gauls have 
removed their breeches, and put on the broad-rimmed toga” of the sena- 
tors.®^ 

Perhaps Caesar purposely made the new Senate too cumbersome a body 
for effective deliberation or unified opposition. He chose a group of friends— 
Balbus, Oppius, Matius, and others— as an informal executive cabinet, and 
inaugurated the bureaucracy of the Empire by delegating the clerical details 
of his government, and the minutiae of administration, to his household of 
freedmen and slaves. He allowed the Assembly to elect half the city magis- 
trates; he chose the rest by “recommendations” which the Assembly regu- 
larly approved. As tribune he could veto the decisions of other tribunes or 
consuls. He increased the praetors to sixteen, and the quaestors to forty, to 
expedite municipal and judicial business. He kept a personal eye on every 
aspect of the city’s affairs, and tolerated no incompetence or waste. In the 
city charters that he granted he placed severe injunctions and penalties 



192 CAESAR AND CHRIST (CHAP. IX 

against electoral corruption and official malfeasance. To end the domination 
of politics by organized vote buying, and perhaps to secure his power 
against proletarian revolt, he abolished the collegia, except some of ancient 
origin and the essentially rehgious associations of the Jews. He restricted 
jury service to the two upper classes and reserved for himself the right to 
try the most vital cases; frequently he sat as judge, and none could deny 
the wisdom and impartiality of his decisions. He proposed to the jurists of 
his time an orderly codification of existing Roman law, but his early death 
frustrated the plan. 

Resuming the work of the Gracchi, he distributed lands to his veterans 
and the poor; this policy, continued by Augustus, for many years pacified 
the agrarian agitation. To forestall the rapid reconcentration of landowner- 
ship he ruled that the new lands could not be sold within twenty years; and 
to check rural slavery he passed a measure requiring that a third of the 
laborers on ranches should be freemen. Having turned many idle proletaires 
into soldiers and then into peasant proprietors, he further diminished their 
ranks by sending 80,000 citizens as colonists to Carthage, Corinth, Seville, 
Arles, and other centers. To provide work for the remaining unemployed 
in Rome he spent 160,000,000 sesterces in a great building program. He had 
a new and more spacious meeting place for the assemblies set up in the Field 
of Mars, and relieved the congestion of business in the Forum by adding, 
near if, a Forum lulium. He embellished likewise many cities in Italy, Spain, 
Gaul, and Greece. Having so eased the pressure of poverty, he required a 
means test for eligibUity to the state dole of grain. At once the number of 
applicants fell from 320,000 to 150,000. 

So far he had remained true to his role as a champion of the poptilares. 
But since the Roman revolution was more agrarian than industrial, and was 
aimed chiefly at the landed slave-driving aristocracy, then at the money- 
lenders, and only mildly at the business classes, Caesar continued the 
Gracchan policy of inviting businessmen to support the agrarian and fiscal 
revolution. Cicero sought to unite the middle classes with the aristocracy; 
Caesar sought to unite them with the plebs. Many of the great capitalists, 
from Crassus to Balbus, helped to finance him, as similar men helped the 
American and French Revolutions. Nevertheless, Caesar ended one of the 
richest sources of financial profiteering— the collection of provincial taxes 
through corporations of pubUcans. He scaled down debts, enacted severe 
laws against excessive interest rates, and relieved extreme cases of insolvency 
by establishing the law of bankruptcy essentially as it stands today. He 
restored the stability of the currency by basing it upon gold and issuing a 
golden aureus, equivalent in purchasing power to the British pound sterhng 
in the nineteenth century. The coins of his government were stamped with 






CAESAR 


193 


CHAP. IX) 

his own features and were designed with an artistry new to Rome. A novel 
order and competence entered the administration of the Empire’s finances, 
with the result that when Caesar died the Treasury contained 700,000,000 
sesterces, and his private treasury 100,000,000. 

As a scientific basis for ta x ation and administration, he had a census taken 
of Italy, and planned a like census of the Empire. To replenish a citizenry 
decimated by war, he granted the Roman franchise widely— among others, 
to physicians and teachers in Rome. Long disturbed by the fall in the birth 
rate, he had in 59 given precedence in land allotments to fathers of three 
children; now he promulgated rewards for large families and forbade child- 
less women under forty-five to ride in litters or wear jewelry— the weakest 
and most futile part of his varied legislation. 

Still an agnostic, though not quite free from superstitions,®® Caesar 
remained high priest of the state religion and provided it with the usual 
funds. He restored old temples and built new ones, honoring above all his 
alma mater Venus. But he allowed full liberty of conscience and worship, 
withdrew old prohibitions against the Isis cult, and protected the Jews in 
the exercise of their faith. Noting that the calendar of the priests had lost 
all concord with the seasons, he commissioned the Alexandrian Greek 
Sosigenes to devise, on Egyptian models, the “Julian calendar”: henceforth 
the year was to consist of 365 days, with an added day in every fourth Feb- 
ruary. Cicero complained that Caesar, not content with ruling the earth, 
was now regulating the stars; but the Senate accepted the reform graciously, 
and gave the dictator’s family name, Julius, to the month Quin ctihs— which 
had been fifth when March opened the year. 

As impressive as these things done are the works begun or planned by 
Caesar but postponed by his assassination. He laid the foundations of a great 
theater, and of a temple to Mars proportioned to that god’s voracity. He 
appointed Varro to head an organization for the establishment of public 
libraries. He designed to free Rome from malaria by draining Lake Fucinus 
and the Pontine marshes, and reclaiming these acres for tillage. He proposed 
to raise dykes to control the Tiber’s floods; by diverting the course of that 
stream he hoped to improve the harbor at Ostia, periodically ruined by the 
river’s silt. He instructed his engineers to prepare plans for building a road 
across central Italy and for cutting a cand at Corinth. 

The most resented of his undertakings was to make the freemen of Italy 
equal citizens with those of Rome, and the provinces ultimately equal with 
Italy. In 49 he had enfranchised Cisalpine Gaul; now (44) he drew up a 
municipal charter, apparently for all the cities of Italy, equalizing their 
rights with Rome’s; probably he was planning some representative govern- 
ment by which they would have had a democratic share in his constimtional 



194 


CAESAR AND CHRIST 


(chap. IX 

monarchy.®® He took the appointment of provincial governors out of the 
hands of the corrupt Senate and himself named to these posts men of 
proved ability, who remained at every moment subject to recall at his will. 
He reduced provincial taxes by a third, and entrusted their collection to 
special officials responsible to himself. He overrode ancient curses to restore 
Capua, Carthage, and Corinth-completing again the work of the Gracchi. 
To the colonists whom he sent to found or people a score of cities from 
Gibraltar to the Black Sea, he gave Roman or Latin rights, and evidently 
hoped to extend Roman citizenship to all free adult males in the Empire; 
the Senate was then to represent not a class in Rome, but the mind and will 
of every province. This conception of government, and Caesar s reorgani- 
zation of Rome and Italy, completed the miracle whereby the youthful 
spendthrift and roisterer had become one of the ablest, bravest, fairest, and 
most enlightened men in all the sorry annals of politics. 

Like Alexander he did not know where to stop. Contemplating his re- 
ordered realm, he resented its exposure to attack at the Euphrates, the 
Danube, and the Rhine. He dreamed of a great expedition to capture Parthia 
and avenge his old pocketbook Crassus; of a march around the Black Sea 
and the pacification of Scythia; of the exploration of the Danube and the 
conquest of Germany.®® Then, having made the Empire secure, he would 
return to Rome laden with honor and spoils, rich enough to end economic 
depression, powerful enough to ignore all opposition, free at last to name 
his successor, and to die with the pax Roinana as his supreme legacy to the 
world. 


IX. BRUTUS 

When news of this plan triclded through Rome the common people, who 
love glory, applauded; the business classes, smelling war orders and pro- 
vincial loot, licked their chops; the aristocracy, foreseeing its extinction on 
Caesar’s return, resolved to kill, him before he could go. 

He had treated these bluebloods with such generosity as to stir Cicero’s 
eloquence in his praise. He had forgiven all surrendering foes and had con- 
demned to death only a few officers who, defeated and pardoned, had fought 
against him again. He had burned unread the correspondence he had found 
in the tents of Pompey and Scipio. He had sent the captured daughter and 
grandchildren of Pompey to Pompey’s son Sextus, who was still in arms 
against him; and he had restored the statues of Pompey which his followers 
had thrown down. He had given provincial governorships to Brutus and 
Cassius, and high office to many others of their class. He bore silently a 
thousand slanders, and instituted no proceedings against those whom he 



CAESAR 


195 


CHAP. IX) 

suspected of plotting against his life. To Qcero, who had trimmed his wind 
to every sale, he offered not only pardon but honor, and refused nothing 
that the orator asked for himself or his Pompeian friends; he even forgave, 
at Cicero’s urging, the unrepentant Marcus Marcellus. In a pretty speech 
For Marc elhis (46) Cicero acclaimed Caesar’s “unbelievable liberality,” and 
admitted that Pompey, victorious, would have been more vengeful. “I have 
heard with regret,” he said, “your celebrated and highly philosophical 
remark, lam satis vixi, ‘I have lived enough, whether for nature or for 
fame.’ . . . Put aside, I beg you, that wisdom of the sage; do not be wise at 
the cost of our peril. ... You are still far from the completion of your 
greatest labors; you have not yet laid their foundations.” And he solemnly 
promised Caesar, in the name of all the Senate, that they would watch over 
his safety and oppose with their own bodies any attack upon him.“^ Cicero 
now prospered so well that he planned to buy still another palace— no less 
than that of Sulla himself. He enjoyed the dinners to which he was invited 
by Antony, Balbus, and others of Caesar’s aides; never before had his letters 
been so gay.®® Caesar was not deceived; he wrote to Matins: “If anyone is 
gracious, it is Cicero; but I doubt not that he hates me bitterly.” When 
reassured Pompeians resumed their opposition, this unctuous Talleyrand of 
the pen fell in with their hopes and wrote a eulogy of the younger Cato that 
should have put Caesar on his guard. Caesar contented himself with writing 
a reply, the Atiti-Cato, which did not show the dictator at his best; in this 
duel he had given Cicero the choice of weapons, and the orator had won. 
Public opinion praised Cicero’s style, and the mildness of a ruler who com- 
posed a pamphlet when he might have signed a death warrant. 

Men who have been deprived of wonted power cannot be mollified by 
pardoning their resistance; it is as difficult to forgive forgiveness as it is to 
forgive those whom we have injured. The aristocrats fretted in a Senate that 
dared not reject the proposals that Caesar so constitutionally submitted to 
them. They patriotically denounced the destruction of a liberty that had 
fattened their purses, and would not admit that the restoration of order 
required the hmitation of their freedom. They looked with horror upon the 
presence of Cleopatra and Caesarion in Rome; it was true that Caesar was 
living with his wife Calpurnia apparently in mutual affection; but who 
could say— who would not say— what happened on his frequent visits to the 
gorgeous queen? Rumors persisted that he would make himself king, marry 
her, and place the capital of their united empires in the East. Had he not 
ordered his statue to be erected on the Capitol next to those of Rome’s 
ancient kings? Had he not stamped his own image upon Roman coins— an 
unprecedented insolence? Did he not wear robes of purple, usually reserved 
for kings? At the Lupercalia, on February 15, 44, the consul Antony, 



19*5 CAESAR AND CHRIST (cHAP. IX 

sacerdotally naked* and impiously drunk, tried thrice to place a royal 
crown upon Caesar’s head. Thrice Caesar refused; but was it not because 
the crowd murmured disapproval.? Did he not dismiss from office the tribunes 
who removed from his statue the royal diadem placed upon it by his friends? 
When the Senate approached him as he sat in the Temple of Venus, he did 
not rise to receive them. Some explained that he had been overcome by an 
epileptic stroke; others, that he was suffering from diarrhea and had 
remained seated to avoid a movement of his bowels at so unpropitious a 
moment.®® But many patricians feared that any day might see him pro- 
claimed a king. 

Shortly after the Lupercalia, Gaius Cassius, a sickly man— “pale and lean,” 
as Plutarch describes him approached Marcus Brutus and suggested the 
assassination of Caesar. He had already won to his plan several senators, some 
capitalists whose provincial pillage had fallen with Caesar’s restriction of 
the publicans, even some of Caesar’s generals, who felt that the spoils and 
offices awarded them had not quite equaled their deserts. Brutus was needed 
as the front of the conspiracy, for he had won a wide reputation as the 
most virtuous of men. He was supposedly descended from the Brutus who 
had expelled the kings 464 years before. His mother Servilia was Cato’s 
half sister; his wife Portia was Cato’s daughter and the widow of Caesar’s 
enemy Bibulus. “It was thought,” says Appian, “that Brutus was Caesar’s 
son, as Caesar was the lover of Servilia about the time of Brutus’ birth” 
Plutarch adds that Caesar believed Brutus to be his son.®® Possibly Brutus 
himself shared this opinion, and hated the dictator for having seduced his 
mother and made him, in the gossip of Rome, a bastard instead of a Brutus. 
He had always been moody and taciturn, as if brooding over a secret wrong; 
at the same time he carried himself proudly, as one who in any case bore 
noble blood in his veins. He was a master of Greek and a devotee of philos- 
ophy; in metaphysics a follower of Plato, in ethics, of Zeno. It was not lost 
upon him that Stoicism, like Greek and Roman opinion, approved tyranni- 
cide. “Our ancestors,” he wrote to a friend, “thought that we ought not to 
endure a tyrant even if he were our own father.” ®^ He composed a treatise 
on Virtue and was later confused with that abstraction. Through interme- 
diaries he lent money at forty-eight per cent to the citizens of Cyprian 
Salamis; when they balked at paying the accumulated interest he urged 
Qcero, then proconsul in Cilicia, to enforce the collection with Roman 
arms.®® He governed Cisalpine Gaul with integrity and competence and, 
returning to Rome, was made urban praetor by Caesar (45). 

Every generous element in his nature rebelled against Cassius’ proposal. 


• Cf. p. 65. 


CAESAR 


CHAP, ix) 


‘97 


Cassius reminded him of his rebel ancestry, and perhaps Brutus felt chal- 
lenged to prove it by imitation. The sensitive youth blushed when he saw, 
afnxed to statues of the older Brutus, such inscriptions as “Brutus, are you 
dead.^”— or, “Your posterity is unworthy of you.”®® Cicero dedicated to 
him several treatises written in these years. Meanwhile it was whispered 
among the patricians that at the next meeting of the Senate, on March 15, 
Lucius Cotta would move that Caesar be made king, on the ground that 
according to the Sibylline oracle the Parthians would be conquered only 
by a king.®' A Senate half filled with Caesar’s appointees, said Cassius, would 
pass the measure, and all hope of restoring the Republic would be lost. 
Brutus yielded; and the conspirators then made definite plans. Portia drew 
the secret from her husband by stabbing her thigh to show that no physical 
injury could make her speak against her will. In a moment of unprophetic 
sentiment Brutus insisted that Antony should be spared. 

On the evening of March 14, to a gathering at his home, Caesar proposed 
as topic of conversation, “What is the best death?” His own answer was, 
“A sudden one.” The next morning his wife begged him not to go to the 
Senate, saying that she had dreamed of seeing him covered with blood. A 
like-minded servant sought to provide a deterrent omen by causing an 
ancestral picture to fall from the wall. But Decimus Brutus, who was one 
of his closest friends and was also one of the conspirators— urged him to 
attend the Senate if only to adjourn it courteously in person. A friend who 
had learned of the plot came to warn him, but Caesar had already left. On 
his way to the Senate he met a soothsayer who had once whispered to him, 
“Beware the ides of March”; Caesar remarked, smiling, that the ides had 
come and all was well. “But they have not passed,” answered Spurinna. 
While Caesar was offering the usual presession sacrifice before Pompey’s 
theater, where the Senate was to meet, a tablet informing him of the c®n- 
spiracy was put into his hands. He ignored it, and tradition says that it was 
found in his hand after his death.* 

Trebonius, a conspirator who had been a favored general of Caesar, 
detained Antony from the meeting by conversation. When Caesar entered 
the theater and took his seat, the “Liberators” flung themselves upon him 
without delay. “Some have written,” reports Suetonius, “that when Marcus 
Brutus rushed at him he said, in Greek, kai m tekiion—Yon, too, my 
child? ’ ” ®® "WTien Brutus struck him, says Appian, Caesar ended all resist- 
ance; drawing his robe over his face and head, he submitted to the blows 
and fell at the foot of Pompey’s statue.'^® One wish had been granted to the 
most complete man that antiquity produced. 

• These stories of the ides of March appear in Suetonius, Plutarch, and Appian; but 
they may be legend nevertheless. 



CHAPTER X 


Antony 

44-30 B.C. 


I. ANTONY AND BRUTUS 

T he assassination of Caesar was one of the major tragedies of history. 

Not merely in the sense that it interrupted a great labor of statesman- 
ship and led to fifteen years more of chaos and war; civilization survived, 
and Augustus completed what Caesar had h'^'^un. It was a tragedy also in 
the sense that probably both parties were right; the conspirators in thinking 
that Caesar meditated monarchy, Caesar in thinking that disorder and 
empire had made monarchy inevitable. Men have divided on the issue ever 
since the Senate sat for a moment in consternation at the deed and then fled 
in tumult and terror from the hall. Antony, arriving after the event, saw 
valor in discretion and fortified himself in his house. Cicero’s eloquence lost 
its tongue, even when Brutus, dagger in hand, hailed him as “Father of His 
Country.” Emerging, the conspirators found an excited populace in the 
square; they tried to win it with catchwords of Liberty and the Republic, 
but the dazed crowd had no homage for phrases so long used to cover greed. 
Fearing for their lives, the assassins took refuge in the buildings on the 
Capitol and surrounded themselves there with their personal gladiatorial 
guards. Toward evening Cicero joined them. Antony, approached by their 
emissaries, sent a friendly reply. 

The next day a larger crowd gathered in the Forum. The conspirators 
sent agents to buy its support and organize it into a legal assembly; then they 
ventured down from the Capitol, and Brutus dehvered an oration which 
he had prepared for the Senate. The speech failed to move its hearers. Cassius 
tried and was met with cold silence. The Liberators returned to the Capitol, 
and as the crowd thinned out they stealthily departed to their homes. Antony, 
thinking himself Caesar’s heir, obtained from the stunned Calpurnia all the 
papers and funds that the dictator had left in his palace; at the same time 
he secretly summoned Caesar’s veterans to Rome. On the 17th, by his 
authority as tribune, he convened the Senate and astonished all parties by 
his amiability and calm. He accepted Cicero’s proposal for a general amnesty, 
and agreed that Brutus and Cassius should receive provincial governorships 



ANTONY 


199 


CHAP. X) 

(i.e., flight with safety and power) , on condition that the Senate should ratify 
all the decrees, legislation, and appointments of Caesar. Since a majority of 
the Senate owed office or emoluments to these acts, it consented; and when 
it adjourned Antony was acclaimed as a statesman who had snatched peace 
out of the jaws of war. That evening he entertained Cassius for dinner. On 
the 1 8th the Senate met again, recognized Caesar’s will, voted him a public 
funeral, and appointed Antony to deliver the customary eulogy. 

On the 19th Antony secured the will from the Vestal Virgins, with whom 
it had been deposited, and read it, first to a small, then to a larger gathering. 
It bequeathed Caesar’s private fortune to three grandnephews and (to the 
astonishment and anger of Antony) named one of them, Caius Octavius, 
as adoptive son and heir. The dictator had devised his gardens to the people 
as a public park and had left 300 sesterces to every citizen of Rome. The 
news of these benefactions sped through the city; and when, on the 20th, 
Caesar’s body, which had been embalmed in his home, was brought into the 
Forum for the last rites, a great concourse of people, including Caesar’s 
veterans, gathered to do him reverence. Antony seems to have spoken at 
first with cautious restraint; but as he went on, his pent-up feelings flared 
into eloquence. When he raised from the ivory bier the torn and bloody 
robe through which Caesar had been stabbed, the emotions of the crowd 
were stirred beyond control. Amid weird wailing and frenzied cries men 
gathered wood anywhere and built a fire beneath the corpse. Veterans threw 
their weapons upon the pyre as an offering, actors threw their costumes, 
musicians their instruments, women their most precious ornaments. Taking 
brands from the fire, some enthusiasts sought to bum down the houses of 
the conspirators; but these buildings were well guarded, and their masters 
had fled from Rome. A large part of the crowd stayed all night long by the 
smoldering pyre; many Jews, grateful for Caesar’s sympathetic legislation, 
remained there three days, intoning their ancient funeral chants. During 
those days riot surged through the capital; at last Antony directed his sol- 
diers to restore order and to fling persistent marauders from the Tarpeian 
rock. 

Antony was one half of what Caesar had been, as Augustus would be the 
other half; Antony was a good general, Augustus a superlative statesman; 
neither would be both. Bom in 82 b.c., Antony had spent a large part of his 
life in camps and more in the quest of wine, women, good food, and fun. 
Though of high lineage and handsome features, he had the characteristic vir- 
tues of the common man: strength of body, animal spirits, good namre, gen- 
erosity, courage, and loyalty. He had scandalized even Caesar by keeping a 
harem of both sexes in Rome, and traveling with a Greek courtesan in his lit- 
ter.^ He had bought in Pompey’s house at auction, occupied it, and then re- 



200 CAESAR AND CHRIST (CHAP. X 

fused payment.^ Now he found in Caesar’s papers, or (some said) placed 
there, whatever it suited him to find— appointments for his friends, decrees for 
his purposes, perquisites for himself; in two weeks’ time he had paid off 
$1,500,000 in debts and had become a rich man. He seized the $25,000,000 
that Caesar had deposited in the Temple of Ops and took another $5,000,000 
from Caesar’s private treasury. Noting that Decimus Brutus, whom Caesar 
had appointed governor of Cisalpine Gaul, had assumed that lucrative office 
despite sharing in the assassination of Caesar, Antony passed through the 
Assembly a bill giving himself that strategic province and consoling Decimus 
with Macedonia. Likewise Marcus Brutus and Cassius were to surrender 
Macedonia to Decimus and Syria to Dolabella, and were to content them- 
selves with sharing Cyrene and Crete. 

Alarmed by Antony’s spreading power, the Senate invited to Rome, as 
a foil to him, Caesar’s adopted son. Caius Octavius, who was to make himself 
the greatest statesman in Roman history, was eighteen years old in 44. By 
natural custom he took his adoptive father’s name; adding his own as a 
modifier, he became Caius Julius Caesar Octavianus, until, seventeen years 
later, he received that lofty name of Augustus by which the centuries have 
known him. His grandmother was Caesar’s sister Julia; his grandfather had 
been a banker of plebeian stock at Velitrae, in Latium; his father had served 
as plebeian aedile, then praetor, then governor of Macedonia. The boy was 
trained to Spartan simplicity, and educated in the literature and philosophy 
of Greece and Rome. In the last three years he had lived a good part of the 
time in Caesar’s palace. It was one of the sorrows of Caesar’s hfe that he had 
no legitimate son and one of his profoundest insights that he adopted Oc- 
tavius. He took the boy with him to Spain in 45 and was pleased to see the 
courage with which the frail and nervous invalid endured the perils and hard- 
ships of the campaign. He had him carefully instructed in the arts of war and 
government.® Many statues have made his features familiar: refined, deli- 
cate, serious, at once diffident and resolute, yielding and tenacious; an idealist 
forced to be a realist, a man of thought painfully learning to be a man of 
action. He was thin and pale and suffered from a poor digestion. He ate 
little, drank less, and outlived the strong men around him by abstinence and 
the regularity of his life. 

Late in March of 44 a freedman arrived at Apollonia, in Illyria, where 
Octavian was stationed with the army, and brought the news of Caesar’s 
death and will. The sensitive youth was horrified at men’s ingratitude; all 
his love for the great-uncle who had so cherished him, and had worked so 
feverishly to rebuild a shattered state, welled up in him and filled him with 
a silent resolve to complete the labors of Caesar and avenge his death. He 
rode down to the sea, crossed to Brundisium, and hastened to Rome. His 



CHAP, x) ANTONY 201 

relatives there advised him to stay in hiding lest Antony destroy him; his 
mother likewise recommended inaction; but when he scorned such a course 
she rejoiced, merely suggesting that whenever possible he should use pa- 
tience and subtlety rather than open war. He followed this wise counsel 
to the end. 

He visited Antony and inquired what was being done against Caesar’s 
enemies. He was shocked to find Antony busy planning to lead an army 
against Decimus Brutus, who had refused to surrender Cisalpine Gaul. He 
asked Antony to disburse Caesar’s legacies according to will, especially the 
forty-five dollars bequeathed to every citizen. Antony saw many reasons 
for delay. Octavian thereupon distributed the money to Caesar’s veterans 
out of funds borrowed by him from Caesar’s friends, and with this approach, 
organized his own army. 

Infuriated by the insolence of this “boy,” as he called him, Antony an- 
nounced that an attempt had been made upon his life and that the would-be 
assassin had named Octavian as the instigator of his plan. Octavian protested 
his innocence. Cicero took advantage of the quarrel to persuade him that 
Antony was a ruffian, who must be defeated. Octavian agreed, joined his 
two legions with those of the consuls Hirtius and Pansa, and marched with 
them northward to battle Antony. Cicero lent this new civil war the aid 
of his invective in fourteen powerful “Philippics” against the public policy 
and private life of Antony, some delivered to the Senate or the Assembly, 
the rest published as propaganda broadcasts in the best tradition of martial 
blackening. In the ensuing engagement at Mutina (Modena), Antony lost 
and fled (44) ; but Hirtius and Pansa fell, and Octavian returned to Rome 
sole commander of the Senate’s legions as well as his own. With this force 
behind him he compelled the Senate to name him consul, to repeal its amnesty 
to the conspirators, and to sentence them all to death. Discovering that 
Cicero and the Senate were now his enemies, and were merely using him 
as a temporary tool against Antony, he composed his differences with An- 
tony and formed with him and Lepidus the Second Triumvirate (43-33). 
Their combined armies marched into Rome and took it without resist- 
ance. Many of the senators and conservatives fled to south Italy and the 
provinces. The Assembly ratified the Triumvirate and gave it full power for 
five years. 

To pay their troops, replenish their coffers, and revenge Caesar, the three 
men now let loose the bloodiest reign of terror in Roman history. They 
listed 300 senators and 2000 businessmen for execution, and offered 25,000 
drachmas ($15,000) to any freeman, and 10,000 to any slave, who would 
bring in the head of a person proscribed.^ To have money became a capital 
crime; children to whom fortunes had been left were condemned and killed; 



202 


CAESAR AND CHRIST 


(chap. X 

widows were shorn of their legacies; 1400 rich women were required to 
turn over a large share of their property to the Triumvirs; at last even the 
savings deposited with the Vestal Virgins were seized. Atticus was spared 
because he had helped Antony’s wife Fulvia; while acknowledging the 
courtesy, he sent great sums to Brutus and Cassius. The Triumvirs set their 
soldiers to guard all exits from the city. The proscribed hid in wells, sewers, 
attics, chimneys. Some died resisting, some submitted quietly to their slay- 
ers; some starved, hanged, or drowned themselves; some leaped from a roof 
or into a fire; some were killed by mistake; some, not proscribed, committed 
suicide on the bodies of slain relatives. Salvius the tribune, knowing him- 
self doomed, gave a last feast to his friends; the emissaries of the Triumvirs 
entered, cut off his head, left his body at the table, and bade the feast go on. 
Slaves took the opportunity to get rid of hard masters, but many fought to 
the death to protect their owners; one disguised himself as his master and 
suffered decapitation in his stead. Sons died to protect their fathers, others 
betrayed their fathers to inherit a part of their fortunes. Adulterers or de- 
ceived wives surrendered their husbands. The wife of Coponius secured his 
safety by sleeping with Antony. Antony’s wife Fulvia had tried to buy the 
mansion of her neighbor Rufus; he had refused to seU; now, though he of- 
fered it to her as a gift, she had him proscribed and nailed his severed head 
to his front door.® 

Antony placed Cicero high on the list of those who should be killed. 
Antony was the husband of Clodius’ widow and the stepson of the Cata- 
linarian Lentulus whom Cicero had slain in jail; and he resented with some 
reason the unstinted vituperation of the “Philippics.” Octavian protested, 
but not too long; he could not forget Cicero’s glorification of Caesar’s assas- 
sins and the pun by which that reckless wit had excused to the conservatives 
his dalliance with Caesar’s heir.* Cicero tried to escape; but being buffeted 
and sickened by the sea, he disembarked and spent the night in his villa at 
Formiae. The next day he wished to stay there and await his executioners, 
preferring them to a choppy sea; but his slaves forced him into a litter and 
were carrying him toward the ship when Antony’s soldiers came upon them. 
The servants wished to resist, but Cicero bade them set the litter down and 
yield. Then, “his person covered with dust, his beard and hair untrimmed, 
and his face worn with his troubles,”' he stretched his head out so that the 
soldiers might more conveniently decapitate him (43). By Antony’s com- 
mand Cicero’s right hand was also cut off and brought with the head to the 
Triumvir. Antony laughed in triumph, gave the assassins 250,000 drachmas, 
and had head and hand hung up in the Forum.® 

* Cicero had said of Octavian: laudandimi adolescentem, omandum, tollendmn—''t)\e boy 
is to be praised, decorated, and exalted”; but tollendum also meant “to be killed.” « 



ANTONY 


203 


CHAP. X) 

Early in 42 the Triumvirs led their forces across the Adriatic and marched 
through Macedonia into Thrace. There Brutus and Cassius had massed the 
last republican army, financed by exactions beyond even Roman precedent. 
From the Eastern cities of the Empire they demanded, and received, ten 
years’ taxes in advance. When the Rhodians jjroved reluctant, Cassius 
stormed the great port, ordered all citizens to surrender their wealth, killed 
those who hesitated, and carried away $10,000,000. In CiHcia he quartered 
his soldiers in the homes of Tarsus till it paid him $9,000,000 to leave; to raise 
this sum the citizens auctioned off all municipal lands, melted down aU tem- 
ple vessels and ornaments, and sold free persons into slavery— first boys and 
girls, then women and old men, finally youths; many, on learning that they 
had been sold, killed themselves. In Judea Cassius levied $4,200,000 and sold 
the inhabitants of four towns into slavery. Brutus, too, could raise money 
by force. When the citizens of Lycian Xanthus refused his demands, he 
besieged them until, starving but obdurate, they committed suicide en masse.® 
For the most part Brutus, loving philosophy, tarried in Athens; but the city 
was filling with young Roman nobles clamoring for a war of restoration. 
When sufficient funds had been raised Brutus closed his books, joined his 
troops with those of Cassius, and took the field. 

The rival armies met at Philippi in September of 42 . Brutus’ wing forced 
back Octavian’s and captured his camp; but Antony’s routed the legions 
of Cassius. Cassius ordered his shield-bearer to kill him and was obeyed. 
Antony could not follow up his success at once; Octavian was confined to 
his tent with illness, and his troops were in disorder. Antony reorganized 
the whole army and after a few days’ rest led them against Brutus and put 
the last remnants of the republican forces to flight. Seeing his men yield, 
Brutus realized, perhaps with rehef, that all was lost; he threw himself upon 
the sword of a friend and died. Antony, coming upon the body, covered it 
with his own purple robe. They had once been friends. 


II. ANTONY AND CLEOPATRA 

The old aristocracy fought its last land battle at Philippi. Many of them 
—Cato’s son, Hortensius’ son, Quintilius Varus, and Quintus Labeo— joined 
Brutus and Cassius in suicide. The victors divided the Empire between 
them: Lepidus was given Africa, Octavian took the West, Antony, having 
his choice, took Egypt, Greece, and the East. Always needing money, 
Antony forgave the Eastern cities their contributions to his enemies on 
condition that they give him a like sum— ten years’ taxes within a year. His 
old geniahty returned as victory made him seemingly secure. He reduced 



204 CAESAR AND CHRIST (CHAP. X 

his demands upon the Ephesians when their women, dressed as Bacchantes, 
greeted him as the god Dionysus; but he gave his cook the house of a Mag- 
nesian magnate as reward for a distinguished supper. He called an assembly 
of the Ionian cities at Ephesus and settled the boundaries and affairs of these 
states with such good judgment that Augustus a decade later found Httle 
to change. He pardoned all who had fought against him except those who 
had shared in killing Caesar. He gave relief to the cities that had suffered 
most severely from Cassius and Brutus, released several of them from every 
Roman tax, freed many who had been sold into slavery by the conspirators, 
and hberated the cities of Syria from the despots who had overthrown their 
democracies.^'’ 

While displaying these graces of his simple character, Antony surren- 
dered to such exuberant sensuality that his subjects lost respect for his 
authority. He surrounded himself with dancers, musicians, courtesans, and 
roisterers, and took wives and concubines whenever a fair woman struck his 
Olympian fancy. He had sent messengers to bid Cleopatra present herself 
before him at Tarsus and answer charges that she had aided Cassius to raise 
money and troops. She came, but in her own time and way. While Antony 
sat on a throne in the forum, waiting for her to plead and be judged, she 
sailed up the river Cydnus in a barge with purple sails, gilded stem, and 
silver oars that beat time to the music of flutes and fifes and harps. Her 
maids, dressed as sea nymphs and graces, were the crew, while she herself, 
dressed as Venus, lay under a canopy of cloth of gold. When the news of 
this seductive apparition spread among the people of Tarsus they flocked 
to the shore, leaving Antony solitary on his throne. Cleopatra invited him 
to dine with her on her ship. He came with an overawing retinue; she feted 
them with every luxury, and corrupted his generals with gifts and smiles. 
Antony had almost fallen in love with her as a girl in Alexandria; now he 
found her, at twenty-nine, in the full maturity of her charms. He began by 
reproving her, and ended by presenting her with Phoenicia, Coele-Syria, 
Cyprus, and parts of Arabia, Cilicia, and Judea.^^ She rewarded him accord- 
ing to his desire and invited him to Alexandria. There he spent a carefree 
winter (41-40), drinking the Queen’s love, hstening to lectures at the 
Museum, and forgetting that he had an empire to rule. She herself was not 
in love. She knew that Egypt, rich but weak, would soon attract the cu- 
pidity of omnipotent Rome; the only salvation for her country and her 
throne lay in marriage with Rome’s lord. She had sought this with Caesar; 
she sought it now with Antony. And he, who had no policy but Caesar’s, 
was tempted to realize the dream of uniting Rome and Egypt and making 
his capital in the fascinating East. 

While Antony frolicked in Alexandria, his wife Fulvia and his brother 



ANTONY 


205 


CHAP, x) 

Lucius were plotting to overthrow Octavian’s power in Rome. Octavian 
had found no happiness there; the Senate was a rump of adventurers and 
generals, labor was restless with unemployment, the populares were dis- 
organized, Sextus Pompey was blocking the import of food, business was 
petrified with fear, taxation and spoliation had ruined nearly every fortune, 
and many men were living in a reckless and sensual riot on the ground that 
the morrow might in any case bring repudiation of the currency, or further 
spoliation, or death. Octavian himself was anything but an exemplar of 
chastity at this time. To perfect the confusion, Fulvia and Lucius raised 
an army and called upon Italy to oust him. Marcus Agrippa, Octavian’s 
general, besieged Lucius in Perusia and starved him out (March, 40). Fulvia 
died of illness, frustrated ambition, and grief over Antony’s neglect of her. 
Octavian pardoned Lucius in the hope of maintaining peace with Antony, 
but Antony crossed the sea and besieged Octavian’s troops in Brundisium. 
The armies, showing more sense than their leaders, refused to fight each other, 
and compelled them to a peaceable agreement (40) . As a pledge of good 
behavior Antony married Octavian’s sister, the gentle and virtuous Octavia. 
Everybody was briefly happy; and Virgil, writing now his Fourth Eclogue, 
predicted the return of Saturn’s utopian reign. 

In 38 Octavian fell in love with Livia, the pregnant wife of Tiberius 
Claudius Nero. He divorced his first wife Scribonia, persuaded Nero to 
release Livia, married her, and found, in her persuasive counsel and her 
aristocratic connections as a member of the Claudian gens, a passage to rec- 
onciliation with the propertied classes. He reduced taxes, returned 30,000 
runaway slaves to their masters, and set himself patiently to restoring order 
in Italy. With the help of Agrippa, and of 1 20 ships contributed by Antony, 
he destroyed the fleet of Sextus Pompey, secured Rome’s food supply, and 
ended the resistance of the Pompeians (36). The Senate by acclamation 
named him tribune for life. 

After marrying Octavia in a state ceremony at Rome, Antony went with 
her to Athens. There for a time he enjoyed the novel experience of living 
with a good woman. He put aside politics and war and, with Octavia at 
his side, attended the lectures of philosophers. Meanwhile, however, he 
studied the plans that Caesar had left for conquering Parthia. Labienus, son 
of Caesar’s general, had entered the services of the Parthian king and had 
led Parthian armies victoriously into Cilicia and Syria— lucrative provinces 
of Rome (40). To meet this threat Antony needed soldiers; to pay soldiers 
he needed money; and of this Cleopatra had plenty. Suddenly tiring of virtue 
and peace, he sent Octavia back to Rome and asked Cleopatra to meet him 
at Antioch. She brought him a few troops, but she disapproved of his gran- 
diose plans and apparently gave him httle of her fabulous treasury. He 



2o6 


CAESAR AND CHRIST 


(chap. X 

invaded Parthia with 100,000 men (36), tried in vain to capture its citadels, 
and lost almost half his forces in a heroic retreat through 300 miles of hostile 
country. On the way he annexed Armenia to the Empire. He awarded him- 
self a triumph and shocked Italy by celebrating it at Alexandria. He sent a 
letter of divorce to Octavia (32), married Cleopatra, confirmed her and 
Caesarion as joint rulers of Egypt and C)’prus, and bequeathed the Eastern 
provinces of the Empire to the son and daughter that Cleopatra had borne 
him . Knowing that he would soon have to square accounts with Octavian, 
he abandoned himself to a year of frohc and luxury. Cleopatra encouraged 
him to dare the last gamble for omnipotence, helped him to raise an army and 
a fleet, and chose as her favorite oath, “AlS surely as I shall one day give judg- 
ment in the Capitol.” 


III. ANTONY AND OCTAVIAN 

Octavia bore her rejection silently, lived quietly in Antony’s house at 
Rome, and brought up faithfully his children by Fulvia and the two daugh- 
ters that she herself had given him. The daily sight of her mute desolation 
inflamed Octavian’s conviction that both Italy and he were doomed if An- 
tony’s plans succeeded. He saw to it that Italy should realize the situation; 
Antony had married the Queen of Egypt, had assigned to her and her illegiti- 
mate offspring the most tribute-yielding of Rome’s provinces, was seeking 
to make Alexandria the capital of the Empire, and would reduce Rome and 
Italy to subordinate roles. When Antony sent a message to the Senate (which 
he had for years ignored) proposing that he and Octavian should retire to 
private fife, and that the institutions of the Repubhc should be restored, 
Octavian escaped a difficult situation by reading to the Senate what he 
claimed was Antony’s will, which he had taken by force from the Vestal 
Virgins. It named Antony’s children by Cleopatra his sole heirs, and directed 
that he should be buried beside the Queen in Alexandria.^^ The last clause 
was as decisive for the Senate as it should have proved suspicious; instead 
of raising doubts that a will filed in Rome should have made such provisions, 
it convinced the Senate and Italy that Cleopatra was scheming to absorb 
the Empire through Antony. With characteristic subtlety Octavian de- 
clared war (32) against her rather than Antony, and made the conflict a holy 
war for the independence of Italy. 

In September, 32, the fleet of Antony and Cleopatra sailed into the Ionian 
Sea, 500 warships strong; no such armada had been seen before. Supporting 
it was an army of 100,000 infantry and 12,000 cavalry, mostly supphed by 
Eastern princes and kings in the hope of making this a war of hberation from 



ANTONY 


CHAP. X) 


207 


Rome. Octavian crossed the Adriatic with 400 vessels, 80,000 foot, 12,000 
horse. For almost a year the rival forces prepared and maneuvered; then, 
on September 2, 3 1, they fought at Actium, in the Ambracian Gulf, one of 
the decisive battles of history. Agrippa proved the better tactician, and his 
light ships more manageable than Antony’s heavy-towered leviathans. Many 
of these were consumed by fires set by burning brands cast upon them by 
Octavian’s crews. “Some sailors,” says Dio Cassius, 

perished by the smoke before the flames could reach them; others were 
cooked in their armor, which became red hot; others were roasted in 
their vessels as though in ovens. Many leaped into the sea; of these 
some were mangled by sea monsters, some were shot by arrows, some 
were drowned. The only ones to obtain an endurable death were 
those who killed one another.^® 


Antony saw that he was losing, and signaled to Cleopatra to carry out their 
prearranged plan for retreat. She headed her squadron southward and waited 
for Antony; unable to extricate his flagship, he abandoned it and rowed out 
to hers. As they sailed for Alexandria he sat alone on the prow, his head 
between his hands, conscious that everything was lost, even honor. 

From Actium Octavian went to Athens; thence to Italy to quell a mutiny 
among his troops, who clamored for the plunder of Egypt; then to Asia to 
depose and punish Antony’s adherents and raise new funds from long- 
suffering cities; then to Alexandria (30) . Antony had left Cleopatra and was 
staying on an island near Pharos; thence he sent offers of peace, which Oc- 
tavian ignored. Unknown to Antony, Cleopatra sent Octavian a golden 
scepter, crown, and throne as tokens of her submission; according to Dio 
he replied that he would leave her and Egypt untouched if she would kill 
Antony.^® The beaten Triumvir wrote to Octavian again, reminding him 
of their former friendship and of “all the wanton pranks in which they had 
shared as youths”; and agreed to kill himself if the victor would spare Cleo- 
patra. Again Octavian made no reply. Cleopatra gathered all that she could 
of the Egyptian treasury into a palace tower and informed Octavian that 
she would destroy it all, and herself, unless he granted an honorable peace. 
Antony led what small forces remained to him in a last fight; his desperate 
courage won a temporary victory; but on the next day, seeing Cleopatra’s 
mercenaries surrender, and receiving a report that Cleopatra was dead, he 
stabbed himself. When he learned that the report was false he begged to 
be brought to the tower in whose upper chambers the Queen and her at' 
tendants had locked themselves; they drew him up through the window, and 
he died in her arms. Octavian allowed her to come forth and bury her lover; 
then he granted her an audience and, immune to what lure survived in a 



2o8 CAESAR AND CHRIST (CHAP. X 

broken woman of thirty-nine, he gave her terms that made life seem worth- 
less to one who had been a queen. Convinced that he intended to take her 
as captive to adorn a Roman triumph, she arrayed herself in her royal robes, 
put an asp to her breast, and died. Her handmaidens Charmion and Iris 
followed her in suicide.^® 

Octavian permitted her to be buried beside Antony. Caesarion, and An- 
tony’s eldest son by Fulvia, he slew; the children of Antony and the Queen 
he spared and sent to Italy, where Octavia reared them as if they were her 
own. The victor found the Egyptian treasury intact and as abundant as he 
had dreamed. Egypt escaped the indignity of being named a Roman prov- 
ince; Octavian merely mounted the throne of the Ptolemies, succeeded to 
their possessions, and left a prae^ectus to administer the country in his name. 
Caesar’s heir had conquered those of Alexander, and absorbed Alexander’s 
realm; the West again, as at Marathon and Magnesia, had triumphed over 
the East. The battle of the giants was over, and an invalid had won. 

The Republic died at Pharsalus; the revolution ended at Actium. Rome 
had completed the fatal cycle known to Plato and to us: monarchy, aris- 
tocracy, oligarchic exploitation, democracy, revolutionary chaos, dictator- 
ship. Once more, in the great systole and diastole of history, an age of 
freedom ended and an age of discipline began. 



BOOK in 

THE PRINCIPATE 


30 B.C.-A.D. 192 



CHRONOLOGICAL TABLE 


B.C. 

30: Octavian receives tribunician power 
for life; Horace’s and book of 
Satires 

29; Virgil’s Georgies; Horace’s Epodes 
27: Octavian becomes Augustus 
27-A.D. 68: JULIO-CLAUDIAN DY- 
NASTY 

27-A.D. 14: Principate of Augustus 
25: Agrippa’s Pantheon; /?. Tibullus 
23: First 3 books of Horace’s Odes 
20: First book of Horace’s Epistles 
19: Death of Virgil; fl. Propertius 
18: Lex lulia de adulteriis 
13; Theater of Marcellus; fourth book 
of Horace’s Odes 

12-9: Campaigns of Drusus in Germany; 
Tiberius subjugates Pannonia 
9: Fl. Livy; Ara Pads of Augustus 
8: Death of Maecenas and Horace 
6: Tiberius in Rhodes 
2: Banishment of Julia 
Aj>. 4: Augustus adopts Tiberius 
8; Ovid banished to Tomi 
9: Defeat of Varus in Germany; lex 
Papia Poppaea and lex Itdia de 
maritandis ordinibus 
14; Death of Augustus 
14-37: Principate of Tiberius 

14-16: Germanicus and Drusus in Germany 

17-18: Germanicus in the Near East 
18: Death of Ovid 

19: Death of Germanicus; trial of Piso 
20: Lex maiestatis; rise of informers 
23-31: Rule of Sejanus 

27: Tiberius settles at Capraea 
29: Death of Livia; banishment of 
Agrippina 

30: Fl. Celsus, encyclopedist 
31: Death of Sejanus 
37-41: Principate of Gains (Caligula) 
41-54: Principate of Claudius 
41-49: Exile of Seneca 

43: Conquest of Britain 
48: Death of Messalina; Claudius mar- 
ries Agrippina the Younger 
49: Seneca praetor, and tutor to Nero 
54-68: Principate of N ero 

55: Seneca dedicates De dementia to 
Nero; Nero poisons Britannicus 
59: Nero orders death of his mother 
Agrippina 

62: Fall of Seneca; death of Persius; 
Nero kills Octavia and marries 
Poppaea 

64: Burning of Rome; first persecution 
of Christians in Rome 


A.D. 

65: Execution of Seneca and Lucan 
66: Death of Petronius and Thrasea 
Paetus 

68- 69: Principate of Galba 

69 (Jan.-Apr.) : Principate of Otho 
69 (July-Dee.): Principate of Vitellius 

69- 96: FLAVIAN DYNASTY 
69-79: Principate of Vespasian 

70; The Colosseum; Quintilian fills first 
state professorship 
71: Vespasian banishes philosophers 
72: Suicide of Helvidius Priscus 
79-81: Principate of Titus 

79: Eruption of Vesuvius; death of the 
elder Pliny 
81: Arch of Titus 

81-96: Principate of Domitian; fl. Martial 
and Statius 

81-84: Campaigns of Agricola in Britain 
93 : Persecution of Jews, Christians, and 
philosophers 

96-98: Principate of Nerva 
98: Tacitus consul 
98-117: Principate of Trajan 
101-2: Trajan’s first war against the 
Dacians 

105: Tacitus’ Histories 
105-7: Trajan’s second war against the 
Dacians 

in: Pliny the Younger curator of 
Bithynia 

115: Forum and column of Trajan 
114-6: Trajan’s campaigns against Parthia 
1 16: Tacitus’ Annals; Juvenal’s Satires 
117-38: Principate of Hadrian 

119: Suetonius’ Lives of the Caesars 
121-34: Hadrian’s tour of the Empire 
1^4: Fl. Salvius Julianus, jurist 
138-61: Principate of Antoninus Pius 
129: Mausoleum of Hadrian 
161-83: Principate of Marcus Aurelius An- 
toninus 

161- 9: Co-reign of Lucius Verus 
161: Institutiones of Gains 

162- 3: War against Parthia 

166-7: Plague spreads through the Empire 
166-80: War with the Marcomanni 

174 (?): Marcus writes the Meditations 
17 1: Rebellion of Avidius Cassius 
180: Death of Marcus Aurelius 
180-92: Pr’ucipate of Cofmtwdus 
183: Conspiracy of Lucilla 
185: Fxecution of Perennis 
189: Famine; execution of Cleander 
190: Pertinax, prefect 
193 (Jan. i) : Alurder of Commodus 



CHAPTER XI 


Augustan Statesmanship 

30 B.C.-A.D. 14 


I. THE ROAD TO MONARCHY 

F rom Alexandria Octavian passed to Asia and continued the reallotment 
of kingdoms and provinces. Not till the summer of 29 did he reach 
Italy. There almost all classes welcomed and feted him as a savior and joined 
in a triumph that lasted three days. The Temple of Janus was closed as a 
sign that for a moment Mars had had his fill. The lusty peninsula was worn 
out with twenty years of civil war. Its farms had been neglected, its towns 
had been sacked or besieged, much of its wealth had been stolen or destroyed. 
Administration and protection had broken down; robbers made every street 
unsafe at night; highwaymen roamed the roads, kidnaped travelers, and 
sold them into slavery. Trade diminished, investment stood still, interest 
rates soared, property values fell. Morals, which had been loosened by 
riches and luxury, had not been improved by destitution and chaos, for few 
conditions are more demoralizing than poverty that comes after wealth. 
Rome was full of men wdio had lost their economic footing and then their 
moral stability; soldiers who had tasted adventure and had learned to kill; 
citizens who had seen their savings consumed in the taxes and inflation of 
war and waited vacuously for some returning tide to lift them back to afflu- 
ence; women dizzy with freedom, multiplying divorces, abortions, and 
adulteries. Childlessness was spreading as the ideal of a declining vitality; 
and a shallow sophistication prided itself upon its pessimism and cynicism. 
This was not a full picture of Rome, but a dangerous disease burning in its 
blood. On the sea piracy had returned, rejoicing in the suicide of states. 
Cities and provinces licked their wounds after the successive exactions of 
Sulla, Lucullus, Pompey, Gabinius, Caesar, Brutus, Cassius, Antony, and 
Octavian. Greece, which had been the battlefield, was ruined; Egypt was 
despoiled; the Near East had fed a hundred armies and bribed a thousand 
generals; their peoples hated Rome as a master who had destroyed their 
freedom without giving them security or peace. What if some leader should 
arise among them, discover the exhaustion of Italy, and unite them in an- 
other war of liberation against Rome? 

211 



212 CAESAR AND CHRIST (CHAP. XI 

Once a virile Senate would have faced these dangers, raised sturdy legions, 
found for them able captains, and guided them with far-seeing statesman- 
ship. But the Senate was now only a name. The great families that had been 
its strength had died out in conflict or sterility, and the traditions of state- 
craft had not been transmitted to the businessmen, soldiers, and provincials 
who had succeeded them. The new Senate gratefully yielded its major 
powers to one who would plan, take responsibility, and lead. 

Octavian hesitated before abolishing the old constitution, and Dio Cas- 
sius represents him as discussing the matter at great length with Maecenas 
and Agrippa. Since in their judgment all governments were oligarchies, the 
problem could not present itself to them as a choice among monarchy, aris- 
tocracy, and democracy; they had to decide whether, under the given condi- 
tions of space and time, oligarchy was to be preferred in a monarchical form 
based upon an army, or an aristocratic form rooted in heredity, or a demo- 
cratic form resting on the wealth of the business class. Octavian combined 
them all in a “principate” that mingled the theories of Cicero, the precedents 
of Pompey, and the policies of Caesar. 

The people accepted his solution philosophically. They were no longer 
enamored of freedom, but wearily wished for security and order; any man 
might rule them who guaranteed them games and bread. Vaguely they under- 
stood that their clumsy comitia, clogged with corruption and racked with 
violence, could not govern the Empire, could not restore health to Italy, 
could not even administer Rome. The difflculties of freedom multiply with 
the area it embraces. When Rome ceased to be a city-state, empire drove it 
inexorably toward the imitation of Egypt, Persia, and iMacedon. Out of 
the collapse of freedom into individualism and chaos a new government had 
to be created to forge a new order for a widened realm. All the Mediter- 
ranean world lay in disorder at Octavian’s feet, waiting for statesmanship. 

He succeeded where Caesar had failed, because he was more patient and 
devious, because he understood the strategy of words and forms, because 
he was willing to move cautiously and slowly where his great-uncle had 
been forced by the brevity of time to wound hving traditions and crowd 
a generation of changes into half a year of life. Moreover, Octavian had 
money. When he brought the treasury of Egypt to Rome, says Suetonius, 
“money became so abundant that the interest rate fell” from twelve to four 
per cent, and “the value of real estate rose enormously.” As soon as Octavian 
made it clear that property rights were again sacred, that he was through 
with proscriptions and confiscations, money came out of hiding, investment 
took courage, trade expanded, wealth resumed its accumulation, and some 
of it trickled down to the workers and the slaves. All ranks in Italy were 
pleased to learn that Italy was to remain the beneficiary, and Rome the 



CHAP.Xl) AUGUSTAN STATESMANSHIP 213 

capital, of the Empire; that the threat of a resurrected East had for a time 
been laid; and that Caesar’s dream of a commonwealth with equal rights had 
been replaced by a quiet return to the privileges of the master race. 

From this bountiful rapine Octavian first paid his debts to his soldiers. He 
kept 200,000 men in service, each bound to him by an oath of personal 
loyalty; the remaining 300,000 he discharged with an allotment of agri- 
cultural land; and to each soldier he gave a substantial gift of money. He 
lavished presents upon his generals, his supporters, and his friends. On several 
occasions he made up deficits in the public treasury from his private funds. 
To provinces suffering from political depredations or acts of God he re- 
mitted a year’s tribute and sent large sums for relief. He forgave property 
owners all tax arrears and publicly burned the records of their debts to the 
state. He paid for the com dole, provided prodigal spectacles and games, and 
presented cash to every citizen. He undertook great public works to end 
unemployment and beautify Rome, and paid for them out of his purse. Was 
it any wonder that the nations looked upon him as a god? 

While all this money slipped through his hands this bourgeois empereur 
lived simply, shunning the luxuries of the nobles and the emoluments of 
office, wearing the garments woven by the women in his home, and sleep- 
ing always in one small room of what had been the palace of Hortensius. 
When this burned down after he had occupied it for twenty-eight years, he 
built his new palace on the plan of the old, and slept in the same narrow 
cubiculum as before. Even when away from the eyes of the city he lived like 
a philosopher rather than a prince. His sole indulgence was to escape from 
public affairs by sailing leisurely along the Campanian coast. 

Step by step he persuaded, or graciously permitted, the Senate and the 
assemblies to grant him powers that in their total made him in all but name 
a king. He kept always the title of hnperator, as commander in chief of all 
the armed forces of the state. As the army remained for the most part out- 
side the capital and usually outside Italy, the citizens could forget, while 
they went through all the forms of the dead Republic, that they were living 
under a military monarchy in which force was hidden so long as phrases 
could rule. Octavian was chosen consul in 43 and 33, and in every year from 
3 1 to 23. By the tribunician authority conferred upon him in 36, 30, and 23, 
he had for life the inviolability of a tribune, the right to initiate legislation in 
the Senate or the Assembly, and the power to veto the actions of any official 
in 'the government. No one protested against this amiable dictatorship. The 
businessmen who were making hay under the sun of peace, the senators who 
sniffed Octavian’s Egyptian spoils, the soldiers who held their lands or status 
by his bounty, the beneficiaries of Caesar’s laws, appointments, and will- 
all were now agreed with Homer that the rule of one man is best, at least if 



CAESAR AND CHRIST 


214 


(chap. XI 


he should be so free with his funds as Octavian, so industrious and competent, 
and so visibly devoted to the good of the state. 

In 28, as co-censor with Agrippa, he took a census of the people, revised 
the membership of the Senate, reduced it to 600, and was himself named 
permanently princeps senates. The title had meant “first on the roll call of 
the Senate”; soon it would mean “prince” in the sense of ruler, just as 
imperator, through Octavian’s life tenure of the name, would come to mean 
“emperor.” History rightly calls his government, and that of his successors 
for two centuries, a “principate” rather than strictly a monarchy; for until 
the death of Commodus all the “emperors” recognized, at least in theory, 
that they were only the leaders (principes) of the Senate. To make the 
constitutional fagade of his authority more imposing, Octavian in 27 sur- 
rendered all his offices, proclaimed the restoration of the Republic, and ex- 
pressed his desire (at thirty-five) to retire to private life. Perhaps the drama 
had been arranged; Octavian was one of those cautious men who believe 
that honesty is the best policy, but that it must be practiced with discrimina- 
tion. The Senate countered his abdication with its own, returned to him 
nearly aU his powers, implored him to continue his guidance of the state, 
and conferred upon him the title of Augustus which history has mistaken as 
his name. Hitherto the word had been applied only to holy objects and 
places, and to certain creative or augmenting divinities (crugere, to increase) ; 
applied to Octavian it clothed him with a halo of sanctity, and the protection 
of religion and the gods. 


The people of Rome seem to have thought for a while that the “restoration” 
was real, and that they were receiving back the Republic in return for an ad- 
jective. Did not the Senate and the assemblies still make the laws, still elect the 
magistrates? It was so; Augustus or his agents merely “proposed” the laws and 
“nominated” the more important candidates. As imperator and consul he ruled 
the army and the Treasury and administered the laws; and by his tribunician 
privileges he controlled all other activities of the government. His powers were 
not much greater than those of Pericles or Pompey, or any energetic American 
president; the difference lay in their permanence. In 23 he resigned the consulate, 
but received from the Senate a “proconsular authority” that gave him control of 
all officials in all provinces. Again no one objected; on the contrary, when a 
scarcity of grain threatened, the people besieged the Senate with demands that 
Augustus be made dictator. They had fared so ill under the Senatorial oligarchy 
that they were inclined toward a dictatorship, which would presumably cultivate 
their favor as a foil to the power of wealth. Augustus refused; but he took charge 
of the annona, or food supply, quickly ended the shortage, and earned such 
gratitude that Rome looked on with complacency as he remolded its institutions 
in his image. 



CHAP. Xl) 


AUGUSTAN STATESMANSHIP 


215 


II. THE NEW ORDER 

Let us study this principate government in some detail, for in many ways 
it was one of the subtlest political achievements in history. 

The powers of the prince were at once legislative, executive, and judicial: 
he could propose laws or decrees to assemblies or Senate, he could administer 
and enforce them, he could interpret them, he could penalize their viola- 
tion. Augustus, says Suetonius, regularly sat as a judge, sometimes till night- 
fall, “having a Utter placed upon the tribunal if he was indisposed. . . . He 
was highly conscientious and very lenient.” ^ Bearing the duties of so many 
offices, Augustus organized an informal cabinet of counselors like Maecenas, 
executives like Agrippa, generals like Tiberius, and an incipient clerical and 
administrative bureaucracy chiefly composed of his freedmen and slaves. 

Caius Maecenas was a wealthy businessman who devoted half his life to 
helping Augustus in war and peace, in poUtics and diplomacy, at last, un- 
willingly, in love. His palace on the Esquiline was famous for its gardens 
and its swimming pool of heated water. His enemies described him as an 
effeminate epicurean, for he flaunted silks and gems and knew all the lore 
of a Roman gourmet. He enjoyed and generously patronized literature and 
art, restored Virgil’s farm to him and gave another to Horace, inspired the 
Georgies and the Odes. He refused public office, though he might have had 
almost any; he labored for years over principles and details of administration 
and foreign policy; he had the courage to reprove Augustus when he 
thought him seriously wrong; and when he died (8 b.c.) the Prince mourned 
his loss as beyond repair. 

Perhaps it was on his advice that Augustus— himself of middle-class origin, and 
free from the aristocrat’s contempt of trade— named so many businessmen to high 
administrative posts, even to provincial governorships. To a Senate offended by 
this innovation he made amends by manv obeisances, by giving exceptional 
powers to Senatorial commissions, and by gathering about him a concilium prin- 
cipis of some twenty men, nearly all senators. In the course of time the decisions 
of this council acquired the force of senctusconsulta, or decrees of the Senate; 
its powers and functions grcAv as those of the Senate waned. However he might 
lavish courtesies upon it, the Senate was merely his highest instrument. As 
censor he four times revised its membership; he could, and did, eject individuals 
from it for official incompetence or private immorality; most of its new members 
were nominated by him; and the quaestors, praetors, and consuls who entered it 
after their term of office had been chosen by him or with his consent. The richest 
businessmen of Italy were enrolled in the Senate, and the two orders were in 
some measmre brought together in that concordia of united domination which 



2i6 CAESAR AND CHRIST (CHAP. XI 

Cicero had proposed. The power of wealth checked the pride and privilege of 
birth, and an hereditary aristocracy checked the abuses and irresponsibility 
of wealth. 

At the suggestion of Augustus the meetings of the Senate were confined to the 
first and fifteenth of each month and usually lasted but a day. As the princeps 
senatus presided, no measure could be submitted without his consent; and in fact 
all measures presented had been prepared by himself or his aides. The judicial 
and executive functions of the Senate now outweighed its lawmaking. It served 
as a supreme court, governed Italy through commissions, and directed the per- 
formance of various public works. It ruled those provinces which required no 
extensive military control, but foreign relations were now controlled by the 
Prince. Shorn in this way of its ancient authority, the Senate grew negligent in 
even its limited functions, and yielded ever more responsibility to the Emperor 
and his staff. 

The assemblies still met, though with decreasing frequency; they still voted, 
but only on measures or nominations approved by the Prince. The right of the 
plebs to hold office was practically ended in 1 8 b.c. by a law restricting office to 
men having a fortune of 400,000 sesterces ($60,000) or more.^ Augustus ran for 
the consulate thirteen times and canvassed for votes like the rest; it was a gracious 
concession to dramatic technique. Corruption was hindered by requiring every 
candidate to deposit, before election, a financial guarantee that he would ab- 
stain from bribery.® Augustus himself, however, once distributed a thousand 
sesterces to each voting member of his tribe to make sure that its vote would be 
correct.* Tribunes and consuls continued to be elected till the fifth century 
A.D.; ® but as their major powers had fallen to the Prince, these offices were ad- 
ministrative rather than executive and finally became mere dignities. The actual 
government of Rome was placed by Augustus in the hands of salaried regional 
officials, equipped with a force of 3000 police under a praefectus urbi, or munic- 
ipal police commissioner. Further to assure order of the desired kind, and sup- 
port his own power, Augustus, seriously violating precedent, kept six cohorts 
of a thousand soldiers each near Rome and three cohorts within it. These nine 
cohorts became the Praetorian Guard— i.e., guard of the praetorimn, or head- 
quarters of the commander in chief. It was this body that in a.d. 41 made Claudius 
emperor and began the subjection of the government to the army. 

From Rome the administrative care of Augustus passed to Italy and the 
provinces. He conferred Roman citizenship, or the limited franchise of “Latin 
rights,” upon all Italian communities that had borne their share in the war against 
Egypt. He helped the Italian cities with gifts, embellished them with new build- 
ings, and devised a plan whereby their local councilors might vote by mail in 
the assembly elections at Rome. He divided the provinces into two classes: those 
that required active defense, and those that did not. The latter (Sicily, Baetica, 
Narbonese Gaul, Macedonia, Achaea, Asia Minor, Bithynia, Pontus, Cyprus, 
Crete and Cyrene, and north Africa) he allowed the Senate to rule; the others 
—“imperial provinces”— were governed by his own legates, procurators, or pre- 



CHAP.Xl) AUGUSTAN STATESMANSHIP 217 

fects. This pleasant arrangement allowed him to keep control of the army, 
which was mostly quartefed in the “endangered” provinces; it gave him the 
lush revenue of Egypt; and it enabled him to keep an eye on the Senatorial 
governors through the procurators whom he appointed to collect the tribute in 
all the provinces. Each governor now received a fixed salary, so that his tempta- 
tion to mulct his subjects was moderately reduced; furthermore, a body of civil 
servants provided a continuing administration and a check upon the malfeasance 
of their temporary superiors. The kinglets of client states were treated with wise 
courtesy and gave Augustus full allegiance. He persuaded most of them to send 
their sons to live in his palace and receive a Roman education; by this generous 
arrangement the youths served as hostages until their accession, and then as un- 
witting vehicles of Romanization. 

In the flush aftermath of Actium, and possessed of an enormous army and 
navy, Augustus apparently planned to extend the Empire to the Atlantic, 
the Sahara, the Euphrates, the Black Sea, the Danube, and the Elbe; the 
pax Romana was to be maintained not by passive defense but by an aggres- 
sive policy on every frontier. The Emperor in person completed the conquest 
of Spain and so ably reorganized the administration of Gaul that it remained 
at peace for nearly a century. In the case of Parthia he contented himself 
with the return of the standards and surviving captives taken from Crassus 
in 53; but he restored to the throne of Armenia a Tigranes favorable to 
Rome. He sent abortive expeditions to conquer Ethiopia and Arabia. In the 
decade from 19 to 9 b.c. his stepsons Tiberius and Drusus subjugated Illyria, 
Pannonia, and Raetia. Agreeably provoked by German invasions of Gaul, 
Augustus ordered Drusus to cross the Rhine, and rejoiced to learn that the 
brilliant youth had fought his way to the Elbe. But Drusus suffered internal 
injuries from a fall, lingered in pain for thirty days, and died. Tiberius, who 
loved Drusus with all the intensity of a restrained but passionate nature, rode 
400 miles on horseback from Gaul into Germany to hold his brother in his 
arms in the final hours; then he conveyed the body to Rome, walking before 
the cortege all the way (9 b.c.). Returning to Germany, Tiberius in two 
campaigns (8-7 b.c., a.d. 4-5) forced the submission of the tribes between the 
Elbe and the Rhine. 

Two disasters, coming almost together, changed this fever of expansion 
into a policy of peace. In a.d. 6 the lately won provinces of Pannonia and 
Dalmatia revolted, massacred all the Romans in their territory, organized 
an army of 200,000 men, and threatened to invade Italy. Tiberius quickly 
made peace with the German tribes and led his depleted forces into Pan- 
nonia. With patient and ruthless strategy he captured or destroyed the 
crops that could supply the enemy, and by guerrilla warfare prevented new 
plantings, while he saw to it that his own troops were well fed. For three 



2i8 


CAESAR AND CHRIST 


(chap. XI 

years he persisted in this policy despite universal criticism at home; at last 
he had the satisfaction of seeing the starving rebels disband, and of re-estab- 
lishing the Roman power. But in that same year (a.d. 9) Arminius organized 
a revolt in Germany, lured the three legions of Varus, the Roman governor, 
into a trap, and killed every man of them except those who, like Varus, fell 
upon their own swords. When Augustus heard of this he was “so deeply 
affected,” says Suetonius, “that for several months he cut neither his beard 
nor his hair; and sometimes he would dash his head against a door, and cry 
out, ‘Quintilius Varus, give me back my legions!’ ” ® Tiberius hastened to 
Germany, reorganized the army there, stood off the Germans, and, by Au- 
gustus’ orders, withdrew the Roman boundary to the Rhine. 

It was a decision costly to the Emperor’s pride but creditable to his judg- 
ment. Germany was surrendered to “barbarism”— i.e., to a nonclassic culture 
—and was left free to arm its growing population against Rome. However, 
the same reasons that had argued for the conquest of Germany would have 
demanded the subjection of Scythia— southern Russia. Somewhere the Em- 
pire had to stop; and the Rhine was a better frontier than any other west of 
the Urals. Having annexed northern and western Spain, Raetia, Noricum, 
Pannonia, Moesia, Galatia, Lycia, and Pamphylia, Augustus felt that he had 
sufficiently earned his title of “the increasing god.” At his death the Empire 
covered 3,340,000 square miles, more than the mainland of the United States, 
and over a hundred times the area of Rome before the Punic Wars. Augustus 
advised his successor to be content with this, the greatest empire yet seen; 
to seek rather to unite and strengthen it within than to extend it without. 
He expressed his surprise “that Alexander did not regard it as a greater task 
to set in order the empire that he had won than to win it.” ’’ The Pax Romana 
had begun. 


m. SATURNIA REGNA 

It could not be said that Augustus had made a desert and called it peace. 
Within a decade after Actium the Alediterranean knew such economic 
quickening as no tradition could parallel. The restoration of order was in 
itself a stimulus to recovery. The renewed safety of the seas, the stability of 
government, the conservatism of Augustus, the consumption of Egypt’s 
hoarded treasure, the opening of new mines and mints, the reliability and 
accelerated circulation of the currency, the easing of congested population 
into agricultural allotments and colonial settlements— how could prosperity 
resist so unanimous an invitation? A group of Alexandrian sailors, landing at 
Puteoli when Augustus was near by, approached him in festal dress and of- 



CHAP.Xl) AUGUSTAN STATESMANSHIP 219 

fered him incense as to a deity. It was because of him, they said, that they 
could voyage in safety, trade in confidence, and live in peace.® 

Augustus was convinced, as became the grandson of a banker, that the 
best economy was one that united freedom with security. He protected all 
classes with well-administered laws, guarded the highways of trade, lent 
money without interest to responsible land-owners,® and mollified the poor 
with state grain, lotteries, and occasional gifts; for the rest he left enterprise, 
production, and exchange freer than before. Even so, the works directed by 
the state were now of unprecedented magnitude, and played some part in 
restoring economic life. Eighty-two temples were built; a new forum and 
basilica were added to facilitate the operations of finance and the courts; a 
new senate house replaced the one that had incinerated Clodius; colonnades 
were erected to temper the sun; the theater that Caesar had begun was 
completed and named after Marcellus, son-in-law of Augustus; and rich 
men were prodded by the Emperor into spending part of their fortunes in 
adorning Italy with basilicas, temples, libraries, theaters, and roads. “Those 
that celebrated triumphs,” says Dio Cassius, “he commanded to erect out of 
their .spoils some public work to commemorate their deeds.” Augustus 
hoped to make the majesty of Rome enhance and symbolize her power and 
his own. Toward the close of his life he remarked that he had found Rome a 
city of brick and had left it a city of marble.®*’ It was a forgivable exaggera- 
tion: there had been much marble there before, and much brick remained. 
But seldom had any man done so much for a city. 

His indispensable aide in the reconstruction of Rome was Marcus Vip- 
sanius Agrippa. This perfect friend had shared with Maecenas the guidance 
of Augustus’ policy. In his year as aedile (33 b.c.) Agrippa had won the 
public to Octavian by opening 170 pubfic baths, distributing free oil and 
salt, presenting games for fifty-five successive days, and providing free 
barbers for all citizens for a year— apparently all at his own expense. His 
ability might have made him another Caesar; he preferred to serve Augustus 
for a generation. So far as we know, his fife was unstained by public or 
private scandal; Roman gossip, which sooner or later besmirched everyone 
else, left him untouched. He was the first Roman to realize the importance of 
sea power. He planned, built, and commanded the fleet, defeated Sextus 
Pompey, suppressed piracy, and won a world for Augustus at Actium. 
After these victories and his pacification of Spain, Gaul, and the Bosporan 
kingdom, he was thrice offered a triumph and always refused. Enriched by 
a grateful prince, he continued to live without luxury, and devoted himself 
as ardently to public works as he had done to the presen.'ation of the state. 
Out of his own purse he hired hundreds of laborers to repair roads, buildings, 



220 CAESAR AND CHRIST (CHAP. XI 

and sewers, and reopen the Marcian aqueduct. He constructed a new aque- 
duct, the Juhan, and further improved the water supply of Rome with 700 
wells, 500 fountains, and 130 reservoirs. When the people complained of the 
high price of wine Augustus slyly remarked, “My son-in-law Agrippa has 
seen to it that Rome shall not go thirsty.” This greatest of Roman engineers 
created a spacious harbor and shipbuilding center by connecting the Lucrine 
and Avemian lakes with the sea. He built the first of the imposing public 
baths that were to distinguish Rome among the cities. He constructed, 
again out of his own funds, a temple to Venus and Mars, which was rebuilt 
by Hadrian, is known to us as the Pantheon, and still bears on its portico the 
words, M. AGRIPPA . . . FECIT. He organized a thirty-year surv^ey of the 
Empire, wrote a treatise on geography, and made in painted marble a map 
of the world. Like Leonardo he was a scientist, an engineer, an inventor of 
military projectiles, and an artist. His early death at the age of fifty (12 b.c.) 
was among the many sorrows that darkened the later years of Augustus, 
who had given him his daughter Julia in marriage, and had hoped to bequeath 
the Empire to him as the man best fitted to govern it honestly and well. 

Costly public works combined with extended governmental services to raise 
state expenditures beyond precedent. Salaries were now paid to provincial and 
municipal officials, bureaucrats and police; a large army and navy were main- 
tained; buildings were put up or restored without number; com and games 
bribed the populace to peace. Since expenses were met out of current revenue, 
and no national debt was laid upon the future, taxation under Augustus became 
a science and an unremitting industry. Augustus was not relentless; often he 
forgave taxes to harassed individuals and cities or paid them out of his personal 
funds. He returned to the municipalities 35,000 pounds of gold offered him as a 
“coronation gift” on the occasion of his fifth consulate; and he refused many 
other donations .^2 He abolished the land tax laid upon Italy in the Civil War; 
in its stead he levied upon all citizens in the Empire a five per cent tax on be- 
quests to any persons except near relatives and the poor.^® A tax of one per cent 
was placed upon auction sales, four per cent upon the sale of slaves, five per cent 
upon their manumission; and custom dues from two and a half to five per 
cent were collected on nearly all ports of entry. All citizens were subject also 
to municipal taxes, and Roman realty did not share in Italy’s exemption from the 
tax on land. Taxes were paid for water supplied from the public mains. Con- 
siderable revenue came from the leasing of public lands, mines, and fisheries, 
from the state monopoly of salt, and the fines imposed by the courts. The prov- 
inces paid a tributum soli, or land tax, and a tributwn oapir/r— literally a head or 
poll tax, actually a tax on personal property. Taxes flowed into two coffers at 
Rome, both stored in temples: the national Treasury {aerariimi) controlled by 
the Senate, and the imperial Treasury (fiscus) owned and managed by the 



CHAP.Xl) AUGUSTAN STATESMANSHIP 221 

Emperor.* To the latter came the income not only from his vast personal prop- 
erties, but bequests from well-wishers and friends. Such legacies, in the lifetime 
of Augustus, amounted to 1,400,000,000 sesterces. 

All in all, taxation under the Principate was not oppressive, and until Corn- 
modus the results were worth the cost. The provinces prospered and raised 
altars of gratitude or expectation to Augustus the god; even in sophisticated 
Rome he had to censure the people for the extravagance of their eulogies. 
One enthusiast ran through the streets calling upon men and women to 
“devote” themselves to Augustus— i.e., promise to kill themselves when he 
died. In 2 b.c. Messala Corvinus, who had captured Octavian’s camp at 
Philippi, proposed that the title of pater patriae should be conferred upon 
Augustus. The Senate, pleased to have so little responsibility while retain- 
ing honors and wealth, gladly heaped upon the Emperor this and other 
titles of praise. The business classes, now richer than ever, celebrated his 
birthday with a two-day festival year after year. “All sorts and conditions 
of men,” says Suetonius,^^ “brought him gifts on the kalends of January”— 
New Year’s Day. When fire destroyed his old palace every city, apparently 
every tribe and guild, in the Empire sent him a contribution to rebuild it; 
he refused to take more than a denarius from any individual, but never- 
theless he had more than enough. All the Mediterranean world, after its long 
ordeal, seemed happy; and Augustus might believe that his patience and 
labor had accomplished his great task. 


IV. THE AUGUSTAN REFORMATION 

He destroyed his own happiness by trying to make people good as well 
as happy; it was an imposition that Rome hever forgave him. Moral reform 
is the most difficult and delicate branch of statesmanship; few rulers have 
dared to attempt it; most rulers have left it to hypocrites and saints. 

Augustus began modestly enough by seeking to check the racial trans- 
formation of Rome. Population there was not declining; on the contrary, 
it was growing by mass and dole attraction and the import of wealth and 
slaves. Since freedmen were included in the dole, many citizens freed old 
or sickly slaves to have them fed by the state; kinder motives freed more, 
and many slaves saved enough to buy their liberty. As the sons of freed- 
men automatically became citizens, the emancipation of slaves and the 
fertility of aliens combined with the low birth rate of the native stocks to 

• The fisci were, in the Republic, the sealed baskets in which the provincial money tribute 
was brought to Rome. 



222 CAESAR AND CHRIST (CHAP. XI 

change the ethnic character of Rome. Augustus wondered what stability 
there could be in so heterogeneous a population, and what loyalty to the 
Empire might be expected of men in whose veins ran the blood of subject 
peoples. By his urging, the lex Fufia Canmia (z b.c.) and later measures 
enacted that an owner of not more than two slaves might free them all, 
the owner of from three to ten slaves might free half of them, the owner 
of from eleven to thirty one-third, the owner of from thirty-one to one 
hundred one-fourth, the owner of from loi to 300 one-fifth; and no master 
might free more than a hundred. 

One might wish that Augustus had limited slavery instead of freedom. 
But antiquity took slavery for granted, and would have contemplated with 
horror the economic and social effects of a wholesale emancipation, just 
as the employers of our time fear the sloth that might come from security. 
Augustus was thinking in terms of race and class; he could not conceive a 
strong Rome without the character, courage, and political ability that had 
marked the old Roman; above all, the old aristocracy. The decay of the 
ancient faith among the upper classes had washed away the supernatural 
supports of marriage, fidelity, and parentage; the passage from farm to city 
had made children less of an asset, more of a liability and a toy; women 
wished to be sexually rather than maternally beautiful; in general the desire 
for individual freedom seemed to be running counter to the needs of the 
race. To accentuate the evil, legacy hunting had become the most profitable 
occupation in Italy.^® Men without children were sure to be courted in their 
declining years by expectant ghouls; and so large a number of Romans 
relished this esurient courtesy that it became an added cause of childlessness. 
Protracted mihtary service drew a considerable proportion of young men 
from marriage in their most nubile years. A large number of native-stock 
Romans avoided wedlock altogether, preferring prostitutes or concubines 
even to a varied succession of wives. Of those who married, a majority 
appear to have limited their families by abortion, infanticide, coitus inter- 
ruptus, and contraception.^® 

Augustus was disturbed by these insignia of civilization. He began to 
feel that a movement backward to the old faith and morals was necessary. 
Respect for the mos vtaiorum revived in him as the years cleared his vision 
and tired his frame. It was not good, he felt, for the present to break too 
sharply with the past; a nation must have a continuity of traditions to be 
sane, as a man must have memory. He read with aging seriousness the 
historians of Rome, and envied the virtues they ascribed to the ancients. He 
relished the speech of Quintus Metellus on marriage, read it to the Senate, 
and recommended it to the people by imperial proclamation. A large part 
of the older generation agreed with him; it formed a kind of puritan party 



CHAP.Xl) AUGUSTAN STATESMANSHIP 223 

eager to reform morals by law; and probably Livia lent them her influence. 
By his powers as censor and tribune Augustus promulgated— or passed 
through the Assembly— a series of laws of now uncertain date and sequence, 
aimed at restoring morals, marriage, fidelity, parentage, and a simpler life. 
The) forbade adolescents to attend public entertainments except in the 
con pany of an adult relative; excluded women from athletic exhibitions, and 
restricted them to the upper seats at gladiatorial games; limited expenditure 
on homes, servants, banquets, weddings, jewels, and dress. The most im- 
portant of these “Julian laws” * was the lex hilia de pudicitia et de coercendis 
adulteriis (18 b.c.)— “The Julian law of chastity and repressing adultery.” 
Here for the first time in Roman history marriage was brought under the 
protection of the state, instead of being left to the patria potestas. The father 
retained the right to kill an adulterous daughter and her accomplice as soon 
as he discovered them; the husband was allowed to kill his wife’s paramour 
if caught in the husband’s house, but he might kill his wife only if he found 
her sinning in his own home. Within sixty days of detecting a wife’s 
adultery, the husband was required to bring her before the court; if he failed 
to do this, the woman’s father was required to indict her; if he too failed, 
any citizen might accuse her. The adulterous woman was to be banished 
for life, was to lose a third of her fortune and half her dowry, and must 
not marry again. Like penalties were decreed for a husband conniving at 
his wife’s adultery. A wife, however, could not accuse her husband of 
adultery, and he might with legal impunity have relations with registered 
prostitutes. The law applied only to Roman citizens. 

Probably at the same time Augustus passed another law, usually named 
lex hdia de maritandis ordinibus, from its chapter on marriage in the “orders” 
— i.e., the two upper classes. Its purpose was threefold; to encourage and yet 
restrict marriage, to retard the dilution of Roman with ahen blood, and to 
restore the old conception of marriage as a union for parentage. Marriage 
was to be obligatory upon all marriageable males under sixty and women 
under fifty. Bequests conditional on the legatee remaining unmarried were 
made void. Penalties were imposed upon celibates: they could not inherit, 
except from relatives, unless they were married within a hundred days after 
the testator’s death; and they could not attend public festivals or games. 
Widows and divorcees might inherit only if remarried within six months 
after the death or divorce of the husband. Spinsters and childless wives could 
not inherit after fifty, nor before if they possessed 50,000 sesterces ($7500). 
Men of the Senatorial class could not marry a freedwoman, an actress, or a 
prostitute; and no actor or freedman could marry a senator’s daughter. 

* So named from the clan to which Augustus belonged by adoption. 



224 CAESAR AND CHRIST (CHAP. XI 

Women owning above 20,000 sesterces were to pay a one per cent annual 
tax till married; after marriage this tax decreased with each child until the 
third, with whose coming it ceased. Of the two consuls the one with more 
children was to have precedence over the other. In appointments to office 
the father of the largest family was as far as feasible to be preferred to his 
rivals. The mother of three children acquired the ms trium liberorwn—'tisQ 
right to wear a special garment, and freedom from the power of her husband. 

These laws offended every class, even the puritans— who complained 
that the “right of three children” dangerously emancipated the mother from 
male authority. Others excused their celibacy on the score that the “modem 
woman” was too independent, imperious, capricious, and extravagant. The 
exclusion of bachelors from public shows was considered too severe and 
impossible to enforce; Augustus had the clause rescinded in 12 b.c. In a.d. 9 
the lex Papia Poppaea further softened the Julian laws by easing the con- 
ditions under which celibates might inherit, doubling the period in which 
widows and divorcees must remarry to inherit, and increasing the amount 
that childless heirs could receive. Mothers of three children were freed 
from those limits which the lex Vocoma (169 b.c.) had placed upon bequests 
to women. The age at which a citizen might stand for the various offices 
was lowered in proportion to the size of his family. After the law was passed 
men noted that the consuls who had framed it and given it their names were 
childless celibates. Gossip added that the reform laws had been suggested to 
Augustus, who had only one child, by Maecenas, who had none; and that 
while the laws were being enacted Alaecenas was living in sybaritic luxury, 
and Augustus was seducing Maecenas’ wife.^® 

It is difficult to estimate the effectiveness of this, the most important social 
legislation in antiquity. The laws were loosely drawn, and recalcitrants 
found many loopholes. Some men married to obey the law and divorced 
their wives soon afterwards; others adopted children to secure offices or 
legacies and then “emancipated”— i.e., dismissed— them.®® Tacitus, a century 
later, pronounced the laws a failure; “marriages and the rearing of chil- 
dren did not become frequent, so powerful are the attractions of a childless 
state,” Immorality continued, but was more polite than before; in Ovid 
we see it becoming a fine art, the subject of careful instructions from experts 
to apprentices. Augustus himself doubted the efficacy of his laws, and agreed 
with Horace that laws are vain when hearts are unchanged.®® He stru'To-led 
heroically to reach people s hearts: in his box at the games he displayed the 
numerous children of the exemplary Germanicus; gave a thousand sesterces 
to parents of large families; raised a monument to a slave girl who (doubt- 
less without patriotic premeditation) had borne quintuplets; ®^ and rejoiced 
when a peasant marched into Rome with eight children, thirty -six grand- 






Fig. (^Augustus bnperator, froyn the Villa of Livia at Prima Porta 

Vatican, Rome 


CHAP.Xl) AUGUSTAN STATESMANSHIP 225 

children, and nineteen great-grandchildren in his train.*’ Dio Cassius pic- 
tures him making public addresses denouncing “race suicide.” He enjoyed, 
perhaps inspired, the moral preface of Livy’s historj^. Under his influence 
the literature of the age became didactic and practical. Through Maecenas 
or in person he persuaded Virgil and Horace to lend their muses to the 
propaganda of moral and rehgious reform; Virgil tried to sing the Romans 
back to the farm in the Georgies, and to the old gods in the Aeneid; and 
Horace, after a large sampling of the world’s pleasures, tuned his lyre to 
stoic themes. In 17 b.c. Augustus presented the ludi saeculares *— three days 
of ceremonies, contests, and spectacles, celebrating the return of Saturn’s 
Golden Age; and Horace was commissioned to write the carmen saecidare 
to be chanted in procession by twenty-seven boys and as many girls. Even 
art was used to point a moral: the lovely Ara Pacts showed in relief the life 
and government of Rome; magnificent public buildings rose to represent the 
strength and glory of the Empire; scores of temples were erected to stir 
again a faith thathad almost died. 

In the end Augustus, skeptic and realist, became convinced that moral 
reform awaited a religious renaissance. The agnostic generation of Lucretius, 
Catullus, and Caesar had run its course, and its children had discovered that 
the fear of the gods is the youth of wisdom. Even the cynical Ovid would 
soon write, Voltaireanly: expedit esse deos, et lit expedit esse putemus: “it 
is convenient that there should be gods, and that we should think they 
exist.” Conservative minds traced the Civil War, and the sufferings it had 
brought, to neglect of religion and the consequent anger of Heaven. Every- 
where in Italy a chastened people was ready to turn back to its ancient altars 
and thank the deities who, it felt, had spared it for this happy restoration. 
When, in 1 2 b.c., Augustus, having waited patiently for the tepid Lepidus 
to die, succeeded him as pontifex maxinms, “such a multitude from all Italy 
assembled for my election,” the Emperor tells us, “as is never recorded to 
have been in Rome before.” He both led and followed the revival of 
religion, hoping that his pohtical and moral reconstruction would win 
readier acceptance if he could entwine it with the gods. He raised the four 
priestly colleges to unprecedented dignity and wealth, chose himself to 
each of them, took upon himself the appointment of new members, attended 
their meetings faithfully, and took part in their solemn pageantry. He 
banned Egyptian and Asiatic cults from Rome, but he made an exception 
in favor of the Jews, and permitted religious freedom in the provinces. He 
lavished gifts upon the temples and renewed old religious ceremonies, pro- 
cessions, and festivals. The ludi saeculares were not secular; every day of 

• Literally, century games, because given only at long intervals. 




226 


CAESAR AND CHRIST 


(chap. XI 

them was marked with religious ritual and song; their chief significance was 
the return of a happy friendship with the gods. Nourished with such 
sovereign aid, the ancient cult took on fresh life, and touched again the 
dramatic impulses and supernatural hopes of the people. Amid the chaos 
of competing faiths that flowed in upon Rome after Augustus, it held its 
own for three centuries more; and when it died it was at once reborn, 
under new symbols and new names. 

Augustus himself became one of the chief competitors of his gods. His 
great-uncle had set the example; two years after being murdered, Caesar 
had been recognized by the Senate as a deity, and his worship spread 
throughout the Empire. As early as 36 b.c. some Italian cities had given 
Octavian a place in their pantheon; by 27 b.c. his name was added to those 
of the gods in official hymns at Rome; his birthday became a holy day as 
well as a holiday; and after his death the Senate decreed that his genius, or 
soul, was thereafter to be worshiped as cne of the official divinities. All this 
seemed quite natural to antiquity; it had never recognized an impassable 
difference between gods and men; the gods had often taken human form, 
and the creative genius of a Heracles, a Lycurgus, an Alexander, a Caesar, 
or an Augustus seemed, especially to the religious East, miraculous and 
divine. The Egyptians had thought of the Pharaohs, of the Ptolemies, even 
of Antony, as deities; they could hardly think less of Augustus. The ancients 
were not in these cases such simpletons as their modem counterparts would 
like to believe. They knew well enough that Augustus was human; in deify- 
ing his genius, cr that of others, they used dens or tlieos as equivalent to our 
“canonized saint”; indeed, canonization is a descendant of Roman deifica- 
tion; and to pray to such a deified human being seemed no more absurd then 
than prayer to a saint seems now. 

In Italian homes tiie worship of the Emperor’s genius became associated 
with the adoration given to the Lares of the household and the genius of 
the paterfamilias; there was nothing difficult in this for a people which 
through centuries had deified their dead parents, built altars to them, and 
given the name of temples to the ancestral tombs. When Augustus visited 
Greek Asia in 2 1 b.c. he found that his cult had made rapid headway there. 
Dedications and orations hailed him as “Savior,” “Bringer of Glad Tidings,” 
“God the Sen of God”; some men argued that in him the long-awaited 
Messiah had come, bringing peace and happiness to mankind.-® The great 
provincial councils made his worship the center of their ceremonies; a new 
priesthood, the Augustedes, was appointed by provinces and municipalities 
for the service of the new divinity. Augustus frowned upon all this, but 
finally accepted it as a spiritual enhancement of the Principate, a valuable 



AUGUSTAN STATESMANSHIP 


CHAP. Xl) 


227 


cementing of church and state, a uniting common worship amid diverse 
and dividing creeds. The moneylender’s grandson consented to become 
a god. 


V. AUGUSTUS HIMSELF 

What sort of man was this who was heir to Caesar at eighteen, master of 
the world at thirty-one, ruler of Rome for half a century, and architect of 
the greatest empire in ancient history? He was at once dull and fascinating; 
no one more prosaic, yet half the world adored him; a physical weakling 
not particularly brave, but able to overcome all enemies, regulate kingdoms, 
and fashion a government that would give the vast realm an unexampled 
prosperity for two hundred years. 

Sculptors spent much marble and bronze in making images of him: some 
showing him in the timid pride of a refined and serious youth, some in the 
somber pose of a priest, some half covered with the insignia of power, some 
in military garb— the philosopher unwillingly and uneasily playing the 
general. These effigies do not reveal, though sometimes they suggest, the 
ailments that made his war against chaos depend precariously at every step 
upon his fight for health. He was unprepossessing. He had sandy hair, a 
strangely triangular head, merging eyebrows, clear and penetrating eyes; 
yet his expression was so calm and mild, says Suetonius, that a Gaul who 
came to kill him changed his mind. His skin was sensitive and intermittently 
itched with a kind of ringworm; rheumatism weakened his left leg and made 
him limp a bit; a stiffness akin to arthritis occasionally incapacitated his right 
hand. He was one of many Romans attacked in 2 3 b.c. by a plague resem- 
bling typhus; he suffered from stones in the bladder, and found it hard 
to sleep; he was troubled each spring by “an enlargement of the diaphragm; 
and when the wind was in the south he had catarrh.” He bore cold so poorly 
that in winter he wore “a woolen chest protector, wraps for his thighs and 
shins, an undershirt, four tunics (blouses), and a heavy toga.” He dared not 
expose his head to the sun. Horseback riding tired him, and he was some- 
times carried in a litter to the battlefield.®” At thirty-five, having lived 
through one of the most intense dramas in history, he was already old- 
nervous, sickly, easily tired; no one dreamed that he would live another 
forty years. He tried a variety of doctors, and richly rewarded one, Antonins 
Musa, for curing an uncertain illness (abscess of the liver?) with cold 
fomentations and baths; in Musa’s honor he exempted all Roman physicians 
from taxation.®^ But for the most part he doctored himself. He used hot salt 
water and sulphur baths for his rheumatism; he ate lightly and only the 
plainest food— coarse bread, cheese, fish, and fruit; he was so careful of his 



228 


CAESAR AND CHRIST 


(chap. XI 


diet that “sometimes he ate alone either before a dinner party or after it, 
taking nothing during its course.” “ In him, as in some medieval saints, the 
soul bore its body like a cross. 

His essence was nervous vitality, inflexible resolution, a penetrating, 
calculating, resourceful mind. He accepted an unheard-of number of offices, 
and took upon himself responsibihty only less than Caesar’s. He fulfilled 
the duties of these .positions conscientiously, presided regularly over the 
Senate, attended innumerable conferences, judged hundreds of trials, suf- 
fered ceremonies and banquets, planned distant campaigns, governed legions 
and provinces, visited nearly every one of them, and attended to infinite 
administrative detail. He made hundreds of speeches, and prepared them 
with proud attention to clarity, simplicity, and style; he read them instead 
of speaking extemporaneously, lest he should utter regrettable words. Sue- 
tonius would have us beheve that for the same reason he wrote out in 
advance, and read, important conversations with individuals, even with his 
wife."® 

Like most skeptics of his time, he retained superstitions long after losing 
his faith. He carried a sealsldn about him to protect against lightning; he 
respected omens and auspices and sometimes obeyed warnings derived 
from dreams; he refused to begin a journey on what he reckoned to be 
unlucky days."^ At the same time he was remarkable for the objectivity of 
his judgment and the practicality of his thought. He advised young men 
to enter soon upon an active career, so that the ideas they had learned 
from books might be tempered by the experience and necessities of life."® 
He kept to the end his bourgeois good sense, conservatism, parsimony, and 
caution. Festina /eratc— “make haste slowly”— was his favorite saw. Far more 
than most men of such power, he could take advice and bear reproof humbly. 
Athenodorus, a philosopher who was returning to Athens after living with 
him for years, gave him some parting counsel: “Whenever you get ang ry 
do not say or do anything before repeating to yourself the twenty-four 
letters of the alphabet.” Augustus was so grateful for the caution that he 
begged Athenodorus to stay another year, saying, “No risk attends the 
reward that silence brings.” 

Even inore surprising than Caesar’s development from a roistering politi- 
cian into a great general and statesman was the transformation of the merci- 
less and self-centered Octavian into the modest and magnanimous Augustus. 
He grew. The man who had allowed Antony to hang Cicero’s head in the 
Forum, who had moved without scruple from one faction to another, who 
had run the gamut of sexual indulgence, who had pursued Antony and 
Qeopatra to the death unmoved by friendship or chivalry— this tenacious 
and unlovable youth, instead of being poisoned by power, became in his 



AUGUSTAN STATESMANSHIP 


229 


CHAP. XI ) 

last forty years a model of justice, moderation, fidelity, magnanimity, and 
toleration. He laughed at the lampoons that wits and poets wrote about 
him. He advised Tiberius to be content with preventing or prosecuting 
hostile actions and not seek to suppress hostile words. He did not insist 
upon others living as simply as himself; when he invited guests to dinner 
he would retire early to leave their appetite and merriment unrestrained. 
He had no pretentiousness; he buttonholed voters to ask their suffrages; he 
substituted for his lawyer friends in court; he left or entered Rome secretly, ^ 
abhorring pomp; in the reliefs of the Ara Facts he is not set apart from the 
other citizens by any mark of distinction. His morning receptions were open 
to all citizens, and all were affably received. When one man hesitated to 
present a petition he jokingly chided him for offering the document “as if 
he were giving a penny to an elephant.” 

In his senile years, when disappointments had embittered him, and he 
had grown accustomed to omnipotence, even to being a god, he lapsed into 
intolerance, prosecuted hostile writers, suppressed histories of too critical 
a stamp, and gave no ear to Ovid’s penitent verse. Once, it is said, he had 
the legs of his secretary Thallus broken for taking 500 denarii to reveal the 
contents of an official letter; and he forced one of his freedmen to kill him- 
self when found guilty of adultery with a Roman matron. All in all, it is 
hard to love him, ^Ve must picture the frailty of his body and the sorrows 
of his old age before our hearts can go out to him as to the murdered Caesar 
or the beaten Antony. 


VI. THE LAST DAYS OF A GOD 

His failures and his tragedies were almost all within his home. By his three 
wives— Claudia, Scribonia, Livia— he had but one child; Scribonia unwit- 
tingly avenged her divorce by giving him Julia. He had hoped that Livia 
would bear him a son whom he might train and educate for government; 
but though she had rewarded her first husband with two splendid children 
—Tiberius and Drusus— her marriage with Augustus proved disappointingly 
sterile. Otherwise their union was a happy one. She was a woman of stately 
beauty, firm character, and fine understanding; Augustus rehearsed his 
most vital measures with her and valued her advice as highly as that of his 
maturest friends. Asked how she had acquired such influence over him, 
she replied, “by being scrupulously chaste . . . never meddling with his 
affairs, and pretending neither to hear of nor to notice the favorites with 
whom he had amours.” She was a model of the old virtues, and perhaps 
expounded them too persistently. In her leisure she devoted herself to 



CAESAR AND CHRIST 


230 


(chap. XI 


charity, helping parents of large families, providing dowries for poor brides, 
and maintaining many orphans at her own expense. Her palace itself was 
almost an orphanage; for there, and in the home of his sister Octavia, Au- 
gustus supervised the education of his grandsons, nephews, nieces, and even 
the six surviving children of Antony. He sent the boys off early to war, 
saw to it that the girls should learn to spin and weave, and “forbade them 
to do or say anything except without concealment, and such as might be 
recorded in the household diary.” 

Augustus learned to love Livia’s son Drusus, adopted and reared him, 
and would gladly have left him his wealth and power; the youth’s early 
death was one of the Emperor’s first bereavements. Tiberius he respected 
but could not love, for his future successor was a positive and imperious char- 
acter, inclined to sullenness and secrecy. But the comeliness and vivacity of 
his daughter Julia must have given Augustus many happy moments in her 
childhood. When she had reached the age of fourteen he persuaded Octavia 
to allow the divorce of her son Marcellus, and induced the youth to marry 
Julia. Two years later Marcellus died; and Julia, after brief mourning, set 
out to enjoy a freedom she had long coveted. But soon the matchmaking 
Emperor, craving a grandson as heir, coaxed the reluctant Agrippa to 
divorce his wife and marry the merry widow (21 b.c.). Julia was eighteen, 
Agrippa forty-two; but he was a good and great man and agreeably rich. 
She made his town house a salon of pleasure and wit, and became the soul 
of the younger and gayer set in the capital as against the puritans who took 
their lead from Livia. Rumor accused Julia of deceiving her new husband, 
and ascribed to her an incredible reply to the incredible question why, 
despite her adulteries, all the five children she gave Agrippa resembled him: 
ISSumquam msi nave plena tollo vectorem!^^ When Agrippa died (12 b.c.) 
Augustus turned his hopes to Julia’s oldest sons. Gains and Lucius, over- 
whelmed them with affection and education, and had them promoted to 
office far sooner than was legally warranted by their years. 

Again a widow, Juha, richer and lovelier than ever, entered with saucy 
abandon upon a succession of amours which became at once the scandal 
and the joy of a Rome that fretted under the “Julian laws.” To quiet this 
gossip, and perhaps to reconcile his daughter with his wife, Augustus made 
a third match for Julia. Livia’s son Tiberius was compelled to divorce his 
pregnant wife, Vipsania Agrippina, daughter of Agrippa, and to marry the 
equally reluctant Julia (9 b.c.). The young old Roman did his best to be 
a good husband; but Julia soon gave up the effort to adjust her epicurean 
to his stoic ways, and resumed her illicit loves. Tiberius bore the infamy for 
a time in furious silence. The lex lulia de adidteriis required the husband of 
an adulteress to denounce her to the courts; Tiberius disobeyed the law 



CHAP.Xl) AUGUSTAN STATESMANSHIP 231 

to protect its author, and perhaps himself, for he and Livia had hoped that 
Augustus would adopt him as his son and transmit to him the leadership 
of the Empire. When it became clear that the Emperor favored, instead, 
Julia’s children by Agrippa, Tiberius resigned his official posts and retired 
to Rhodes. There for seven years he lived as a simple private citizen, de- 
voting himself to solitude, philosophy, and astrology. Freer than ever, 
Julia passed from one lover to another, and the revels of her set filled the 
Forum with turmoil at night. 

Augustus, now (2 b.c.) an invalid of sixty, suffered all that a father 
and ruler could bear from the simultaneous collapse of his family, his honor, 
and his laws. By these laws the father of an adulteress was bound to indict 
her publicly if her husband had failed to do so. Proofs of her misconduct 
were laid before him, and the friends of Tiberius let it be known that unless 
Augustus acted they would accuse Julia before the court. Augustus decided 
to anticipate them. While the merrymaking was at its height, he issued a 
decree banishing his daughter to the island of Pandateria, a barren rock off 
the Campanian coast. One of her lovers, a son of Antony, was forced to 
kill himself, and several others were exiled. Julia’s freedwcman Phoebe 
hanged herself rather than testify against her; the distraught Emperor, hear- 
ing of the act, said, “I would rather have been Phoebe’s father than Julia’s.” 
The people of Rome begged him to forgive his daughter, Tiberius added 
his request to theirs, but pardon never came. Tiberius, enthroned, merely 
changed her place of residence to a less narrow confinement at Rhegium. 
There, broken and forgotten after sixteen years of imprisonment, Julia died. 

Her sons Gains and Lucius had long preceded her in death: Lucius of an 
illness in Marseilles (a.d. 2), Gains of a wound received in Armenia (a.d. 4). 
Left without aide or successor at a time when Germany, Pannonia, and Gaul 
were threatening revolt, Augustus reluctantly recalled Tiberius (a.d. 2), 
adopted him as son and coregent, and sent him off to put down the rebellions. 
When he returned (a.d. 9), after five years of arduous and successful cam- 
paigning, all Rome, which hated him for his stem puritanism, resigned itself 
to the fact that though Augustus was still prince, Tiberius had begun to mle. 

Life’s final tragedy is unwilling continuance— to outlive one’s self and be 
forbidden to die. When Julia went into exile Augustus was not in years an 
old man; others were still vigorous at sixty. But he had lived too many 
lives, and died too many deaths, since he had come to Rome, a boy of 
eighteen, to avenge Caesar’s murder and execute his will. How many wars 
and battles and near-defeats, how many pains and illnesses, how many con- 
spiracies and perils, and bitter miscarriages of noble aims, had befallen him 
in those crowded forty-two years— and the snatching away of one hope 



232 


CAESAR AND CHRIST 


(chap. XI 

and helper after another, until at last only this dour Tiberius remained! 
Perhaps it had been wiser to die like Antony, at the peak of life and in 
the arms of love. How sadly pleasant must have seemed, in retrospect, the 
days when Julia and Agrippa were happy, and grandchildren frolicked 
on the palace floor. Now another Julia, daughter of his daughter, had grown 
up and was following her mother’s morals as if resolved to illustrate all the 
amatory arts of her friend Ovid’s verse. In a.d. 8, having received proofs 
of her adultery, Augustus exiled her to an isle in the Adriatic, and at the 
same time banished Ovid to Tomi on the Black Sea. “Would that I had 
never married,” mourned the feeble and shrunken Emperor, “or that I had 
died without offspring!” Sometimes he thought of starving himself to 
death. 

All the great structure that he had built seemed to be in ruins. The powers 
that he had assumed for order’s sake had weakened into degeneration the 
Senate and the assemblies from which he had taken them. Tired of ratifica- 
tions and adulations, the senators no longer came to their sessions, and a 
mere handful of citizens gathered in the comitia. Offices that had once stirred 
creative ambition by the power they brought were now shunned by the 
able as empty and expensive vanities. The very peace that Augustus had 
organized, and the security that he had won for Rome, had loosened the 
fibre of the people. No one wanted to enlist in the army, or recognize the 
inexorable periodicity of war. Luxury had taken the place of simplicity, 
sexual license was replacing parentage; by its own exhausted will the great 
race was beginning to die. 

All these things the old Emperor keenly saw and sadly felt. No one then 
could tell him that despite a hundred defects and half a dozen idiots on the 
throne, the strange and subtle principate that he had established would 
give the Empire the longest period of prosperity ever known to mankind; 
and that the Pax Ro?nana, which had begun as the Pax Augusta, would in 
the perspective of time be accounted the supreme achievement in the 
history of statesmanship. Like Leonardo, he thought that he had failed. 

Death came to him quietly at Nola in the seventy-sixth year of his age 
(a.d. 14). To the friends at his bedside he uttered the words often used to 
conclude a Roman comedy: “Since well I’ve played my part, clap now 
your hands, and with applause dismiss me from the stage.” He embraced his 
wife, saying, “Remember our long union, Livia; farewell”; and with this 
simple parting he passed away.*“ Some days later his corpse was borne 
through Rome on the shoulders of senators to the Field of Mars, and there 
cremated wliile cluldrcn of high degree chanted the lament for the dead. 



CHAPTER XII 


The Golden Age 

30 B.C.-A.D. I 8 


I. THE AUGUSTAN STIMU^LUS 

I F peace and security are more favorable than war to the production of 
literature and art, yet war and profound social disturbances turn up the 
earth about the plants of thought and nourish the seeds that mature in peace. 
A quiet life does not make great ideas or great men; but the compulsions 
of crisis, the imperatives of surtdval, weed out dead things by the roots and 
quicken the growth of new ideas and ways. Peace after successful war has 
all the stimulus of a rapid convalescence; men then rejoice at mere being, 
and sometimes break into song. 

The Romans were grateful to Augustus because he had cured, even if by 
a major operation, the cancer of chaos that had been consuming their civic 
life. They were astonished to find themselves rich so soon after devastation; 
and they were elated to note that despite their recent defenseless disorder 
they were still masters of what seemed to them the world. They looked 
back upon their history, from the first to this second Romulus, from creator 
to restorer, and judged it epically wonderful; they were hardly surprised 
when Virgil and Horace put their gratitude, their glory, and their pride 
into verse, and Livy into prose. Better still, the region they had conquered 
was only partly barbarous; a large area of it was the realm of Hellenistic 
culture— of refined speech, subtle literature, enlightening science, mature 
philosophy, and noble art. This spiritual wealth was now pouring into 
Rome, stirring imitation and rivalry, compelling language and letters to 
spruce up and grow. Ten thousand Greek words slipped into the Latin 
vocabulary, ten thousand Greek statues or paintings entered Roman forums, 
temples, streets, and homes. 

Money was passing down, even to poets and artists, from the captors of 
Egypt’s treasure, the absentee owners of Italy’s soil, and the exploiters of 
the Empire’s resources and trade. Writers dedicated their works to rich men 
in the hope of receiving gifts that would finance their further toil; so Horace 
addressed his odes to Sallust, Aelius Lamia, Manlius Torquatus, and Mun- 
atius, Plancus. Messala Corvinus gathered about him a coterie of authors 

233 



234 CAESAR AND CHRIST (CHAP. XII 

whose star was Tibullus, and Maecenas redeemed his wealth and poetry by 
presents to Virgil, Horace, and Propertius, Until his final irascible years, 
Augustus followed a hberal policy toward literature; he was glad to have 
letters and art take up the energies that had disturbed politics; he would 
pay men to write books if they would let him govern the state. His generosity 
to poets became so renowned that a swarm of them buzzed around him 
wherever he went. When a Greek persisted, day after day, in pressing 
verses into his hand as he left his palace, Augustus retaliated by stopping, 
composing some lines of his own, and having an attendant give them to 
the Greek. The latter offered the Emperor a few denarii and expressed his 
regret that he could not give more. Augustus rewarded his wit, not his 
poetry, with 100,000 sesterces,^ 

The stream of books swelled now to proportions unknown before. Everyone 
from fool to philosopher wrote poetry.^ Since all poetry, and most literary 
prose, were designed to be read aloud, gatherings were formed at which authors 
read their productions to invited or general audiences or, in rare moments of 
tolerance, to one another. Juvenal thought that a compelling reason for living in 
the country was to escape the poets who infested Rome.^ In the bookshops that 
crowded a district called the Argiletum, writers assembled to compute literary 
genius, while impecunious bibliophiles furtively read snatches of the books they 
could not buy. Placards on the walls announced new titles and their cost. Small 
volumes sold for four or five sesterces, average volumes for ten ($1.50); elegant 
editions like Martial’s epigrams, usually illustrated with a portrait of the author, 
brought some five denarii (53).^ Books were exported to all parts of the Empire, 
or were published simultaneously in Rome, Lyons, Athens, and Alexandria;^® 
Martial was pleased to Icam that he was bought and sold in Britain. Even poets 
now had private libraries; Ovid affectionately describes his.® We gather from 
Martial that there were already book fanciers who collected de luxe editions, or 
rare manuscripts. Augustus established two public hbraries; Tiberius, Vespasian, 
Domitian, Trajan, and Hadrian built others; by the fourth century there were 
twenty-eight in Rome. Foreign students and writers came to study in these 
libraries and in public archives; so Dionysius came from Halicarnassus, and Di- 
odorus from Sicily. Rome was now the rival of Alexandria as the literary center 
of the Western world. 

T his efflorescence transformed both literature and society. Letters and 
the arts took on new dignity. Grammarians lectured on living authors; 
people sang snatches from them in the streets. Writers mingled with states- 
men and highborn ladies in luxurious salons such as history would never 
know again until the flowering of France. The aristocracy became hterary, 
literature became aristocratic. The lusty vigor of Ennius and Plautus, Lucre- 



THE GOLDEN AGE 


235 


CHAP, xn) 

tius and Catullus, was exchanged for a delicate beauty, or a teasing com- 
plexity, in expression and thought. Writers ceased to mingle with the 
people, ceased therefore to describe their ways or speak their language; a 
divorce set in between literature and life that finally sucked the sap and 
spirit out of Latin letters. Forms were set by Greek models, themes by 
Greek tradition or Augustus’ court. Poetry, when it could spare time from 
Theocritean shepherds or Anacreontic love, was to sing didactically the 
joys of agriculture, the morality of ancestors, the glory of Rome, and the 
splendor of its gods. Literature became a handmaiden of statesmanship, a 
polyphonic sermon calling the nation to Augustan ideas. 

Two forces opposed this conscription of letters by the state. One was 
Horace’s hated and “profane crowd,” which liked the salty tang and inde- 
pendence of the old satires and plays rather than the curled and perfumed 
beauty of the new. The other was that demimonde of jollity and sin to 
which Clodia and Julia belonged. This younger set was in full rebellion 
against the Julian laws, wanted no moral reform, had its own poets, circles, 
and norms. In letters as in life the two forces fought each other, crossing 
in Tibullus and Propertius, matching the chaste piety of Virgil with the 
obscene audacities of Ovid, crushing two Julias and one poet with exile, 
and at last exhausting each other in the Silver Age. But the ferment of great 
events, the releasing leisure of wealth and peace, the majesty of a world 
acknowledging Rome’s sway, overcame the corrosion of state subsidies and 
produced a Golden Age whose literature was the most perfect, in form and 
utterance, in all the memory of men. 


II. VIRGIL 

The most lovable of Romans was bom in 70 b.c. on a farm near Mantua, 
where the river Mincio wanders slowly toward the Po. The capital would 
henceforth give birth to very few great Romans; they would come from 
Italy in the century that was divided by the birth of Christ, and thereafter 
from the provinces. Perhaps Virgil’s veins contained seme Celtic blood, for 
Mantua had long been peopled by Gauls; technically he was a Gaul by 
birth, for it was only twenty-one years later that Cisalpine Gaul received 
the Roman franchise from Caesar. The man who most eloquently sang 
the majesty and destiny of Rome would never show the hard masculinity 
of the Roman stock, but would touch Celtic strings of mysticism, tenderness, 
and grace rare in the Roman breed. 

His father saved enough as a court clerk to buy a farm and raise bees. 



236 CAESAR AND CHRIST (CHAP. XII 

In that murmurous quietude the poet spent his boyhood; the full foliage of 
the well-watered north lingered in his later memory, and he was never 
really happy away from those fields and streams. At twelve he was sent 
to school at Cremona, at fourteen to Milan, at sixteen to Rome. There he 
studied rhetoric and allied subjects under the same man who was to teach 
Octavian. Probably after this he attended the lectures of Siro the Epicurean 
at Naples. Virgil tried hard to accept the philosophy of pleasure, but his 
rural background had ill-equipped him. He seems to have returned north 
after his education, for in 41 b.c. we find him swimming for life to escape a 
soldier who seized by force his father":, farm; Octavian and Antony had 
confiscated it because the region had favored their enemies. Asinius PoUio, 
the learned governor of Cisalpine Gaul, tried to have the farm returned, 
but failed. He atoned by giving his patronage to the young man, and en- 
couraging him to continue the Eclogues he was composing. 

By the year 37 Virgil was drinking in the wine of fame in Rome. The 
Eclogues (“Selections”) had just been published and had been well received; 
some verses had been recited on the stage by an actress and had been 
enthusiastically applauded.® The poems were pastoral sketches in the man- 
ner, sometimes the phrases, of Theocritus, beautiful in style and rhythm, 
the most melodious hexameters that Rome had yet heard, full of pensive 
tenderness and romantic love. The youth of the capital had been long 
enough detached from the soil to idealize country life; everyone was pleased 
to imagine himself a shepherd moving with his flocks up and down the Apen- 
nine slopes, and breaking his heart with love unreturned. 

Realer than these Theocritan ghosts were the rural scenes. Here, too, 
Virgil idealized, but he did not have to imitate. He had heard the wood- 
man’s lusty song and the hovering restlessness of bees; ® and he had known 
the emptyhearted despair of the farmer who, like thousands then, had lost 
his land.® Above all, he felt intensely the hopes of the age for an end to 
faction and war. The Sibylline Books had predicted that after the Age of 
Iron the Golden Age of Saturn would return. When, in 40 b.c., a son was 
bom to Virgil’s patron, Asinius Pollio, the poet announced in his Fourth 
Eclogue that this birth would usher in utopia: 

Ultima Cumaei venit iam carminis aetas; 
magnus ab integro saeclonim nascitur ordo. 

Iam redit et Virgo, redeunt Satumia regna; 
iam nova progenies, caelo demittitur alto. 

Tu modo nascenti puero, quo ferrea primum 
desinet, ac toto surget gens aurea mundo, 
casta fave Lucina; tuus iam regnat Apollo— 



THE GOLDEN AGE 


CHAP, xn) 


237 


“Now comes the final age [announced] in the Cumean [Sibyl’s] chant; the 
great succession of epochs is bom anew. Now the Virgin * returns, the 
reign of Saturn returns; now a new race descends from heaven on high. O 
chaste Lucina [goddess of births] ! smile upon the boy just bom, in whose 
time the race of iron shall first cease, and a race of gold shall arise throughout 
the world. Thine own Apollo is now king.” 

Ten years later these prophecies were fulfilled. The iron tools of war 
were laid aside; a new generation took charge, armed and infatuated with 
gold. Through the brief remainder of Virgil’s life Rome would know no 
further turmoil; prosperity and happiness increased, and Augustus was 
hailed as a savior, though not an Apollo. The quasi-royal court welcomed 
the optimism of the poet’s verse; Maecenas invited him, liked him, and 
saw in him a popular instrument of Octavian’s reforms. This judgment 
showed insight; for to all appearances Virgil, now thirty-three, was an 
awkward mstic, shy to the point of stammering, shunning any public place 
where he might be recognized and pointed out, ill at ease in the voluble and 
aggressive fashionable society of Rome. Besides, even more than Octavian, 
he was an invahd, suffering from headaches, throat ailments, stomach dis- 
orders, and frequent spitting of blood. Virgil never married, and seems to 
have felt no more than his Aeneas the full abandon of love. Apparently he 
consoled himself for a time with the affection of a boy slave; for the rest 
he was known, at Naples, as “the virgin.” 

Maecenas treated the youth generously, had Octavian restore his farm, 
and suggested to him some poems glorifying agricultural life. At that 
moment (37 b.c.) Italy was paying a penalty for letting so much of her 
soil go to pasturage, orchards, and vines; Sextus Pompey was blocking 
the import of food from Sicily and Africa, and a shortage of grain threatened 
another revolution. City life was enervating the young manhood of Italy; 
from every standpoint the health of the nation seemed to require the restora- 
tion of farming. Virgil readily agreed; he knew rural life; and though too 
frail now to bear its hardships, he was just the man to paint its attractive 
features with affectionate memory. He hid himself in Naples, and after 
seven years of file work emerged with his most perfect poems, the Georges 
—literally “the labor of the land.” Maecenas was delighted, and brought 
Virgil south with him to meet Octavian, then (29 b.c.) returning from his 
victory over Qeopatra. At the little town of Atella the weary general 
rested and listened for four enchanted days to the 2000 lines. They fell in 
with his policies more completely than even Maecenas had foreseen. For 
he proposed now to disband the larger part of the immense armies that had 


Astraea, or Justice, the last immortal to leave the earth in the legend of the Saturnian age. 




238 CAESAR AND CHRIST (CHAP. XH 

won the world for him, to settle his veterans on the land, and at once to 
quiet them, feed the cities, and preserve the state, through rural toil. From 
that moment Virgil was free to think only of poetry. 

In the Georgies a great artist deals with the noblest of the arts— the cultiva- 
tion of the earth. Virgil borrows from Hesiod, Aratus, Cato, Varro; but 
he transforms their rough prose or limping lines into finely chiseled verse. 
He covers dutifully the diverse branches of husbandry— the variety and 
treatment of soils, the seasons for sowing and reaping, the culture of the 
olive and the vine, the raising of cattle, horses, and sheep, and the care of 
bees. Every aspect of farming interests and beguiles him; he has to caution 
himself to get on; 

Sed fugit interea, fugit irreparabile tempus, 

Singula dum capti circum vectamur amore— 

“But meanwhile time flies, flies irreparably, while we, charmed with love 
[of our theme], linger around each single detail.” He has a word about the 
diseases of animals and how to treat them. He describes the common farm 
animals with understanding and sympathy; he is never through admiring 
the simplicity of their instincts, the power of their passions, the perfection 
of their forms. He idealizes rural life, but he does not ignore the hardships 
and vicissitudes, the crippling toil, the endless struggle against insects, the 
torturing pendulum of drought and storm. Nevertheless, labor omnia 
vincit; there is in such toil a purpose and result that give it dignity; no 
Roman need feel ashamed to guide a plow. Moral character, says Virgil, 
grows on the farm; all the old virtues that made Rome great were planted 
and nourished there; and hardly any process of seed sowing, protection, 
cultivation, weeding, and harvesting but has its counterpart in the develop- 
ment of the soul. And out of the fields, where the miracle of growth and 
the whims of the sky bespeak a thousand mystic forces, the soul, more readily 
than in the city, perceives the presence of creative fife, and is deepened with 
rehgious intuition, humility, and reverence. Here Virgil breaks into his 
most famous lines, beginning with a noble echo of Lucretius, but passing 
into a pure Virgilian strain: 

Felix qui potuit rerum cognoscere causas, 
atque metus omnis et inexorabile fatum 
subiecit pedibus strepitumque Acherontis avari; 
fortunatus et ille decs qui novit agrestis, 

Panaque Silvanumque senem Nymphasque sorores— 

“Happy the man who has been able to learn the causes of things, and has 
put under foot aU fear and inexorable fate, and the noise of a greedy Hell. 



THE GOLDEN AGE 


239 


CHAP. XIl) 

But happy too he who knows the rural deities, Pan and old Silvanus and 
the sister Nymphs.” The peasant is right in seeking to propitiate the gods 
with sacrifice and enlist their good will; these exercises of piety brighten 
the round of toil with festivals and clothe earth and fife with meaning, 
drama, and poetry. 

Dryden considered the Georgies “the best poem of the best poet.” It 
shares with the De Kerwn Natura the rare distinction of being at once 
didactic and beautiful. Rome did not take it seriously as a handbook of agri- 
culture; we do not hear that anyone, having read it, exchanged the Forum 
for a farm; indeed, as Seneca thought, Virgil may have written these rural 
ecstasies precisely to please an urban taste. In any case, Augustus felt that 
Virgil had performed Maecenas’ assignment marvelously well. He called 
the poet to his palace and suggested a harder task, a vastly larger theme. 


m. THE AENEID 

At first the plan was to sing the battles of Octavian.^® But the supposed 
descent of his adoptive father from Venus and Aeneas led the poet— perhaps 
the Emperor~to conceive an epic on the founding of Rome. As the theme 
developed it came to include, by preview through prophecy, the expansion 
of Rome into the Augustan empire and peace. It would also show the role 
of Roman character in these achievements and seek to make the ancient 
virtues popular; it would picture its hero as reverent of the gods and guided 
by them, and would fall in with the Augustan reformation of morals and 
faith. Virgil retired to various lairs in Italy and spent the next ten years 
(29-19) on the Aeneid. He wrote slowly, with the devotion of a Flaubert, 
dictating a few lines in the fresh morning and rewriting them in the after- 
noon. Augustus waited impatiently for the poem’s completion, repeatedly 
inquired about its progress, and importuned Virgil to bring him any finished 
fragment. Virgil put him off as long as he could, but finally read to him the 
second, fourth, and sixth books. Octavia, Antony’s widow, fainted at the 
passage describing her son Marcellus, but lately dead.^® The epic was never 
completed, never finally revised. In 19 b.c. Virgil visited Greece, met 
Augustus in Athens, was sunstruck in Megara, started home, and died soon 
after reaching Brundisium. On his deathbed he begged his friends to destroy 
the manuscript of his poem, saying that at least three years more would 
have been necessary to give it finished form. Augustus forbade them to 
carry out the request. 

Every schoolboy knows the story of the Aeneid. As Troy bums, the 
ghost of the slain Hector appears to the leader of his Dardanian allies, the 



240 CAESAR AND CHRIST (CHAP. XII 

“pious Aeneas,” and bids him resume from the Greeks the “holy things 
and household gods” of Troy— above all, the Falladimn, or image of Pallas 
Athene, on the retention of which the preservation of the Trojans was be- 
lieved to depend. “Seek for these” sacred symbols, says Hector, “the city 
which, when you have wandered over the sea, you shall at last establish.” 
Aeneas escapes with his old father Anchises and his son Ascanius. They set 
sail and stop at divers places; but always the voices of the gods command 
them to go on. Winds drive them ashore near Carthage, where a Phoenician 
princess. Dido, is founding a city. (When Virgil wrote this, Augustus was 
carrying out Caesar’s plan for rebuilding Carthage.) Aeneas falls in love 
with her. A convenient storm enables them to take refuge in the same 
cave and to consummate what Dido considers their marriage. For a time 
Aeneas accepts her interpretation, and shares with her and his w illin g men 
the tasks of construction. But the relentless gods— who, in classic myth, 
never cared much for marriage— warn him to depart; this is not the capital 
that he must make. Aeneas obeys, and leaves the mourning queen with a 
theme song in his words; 

I will never deny, O Queen, that thou hast deserved of me the ut- 
most thou canst set forth in speech. ... I never held out the bride- 
groom’s torch, nor took the marriage vow. . . . But now Apollo has 
bidden me sail. . . . Cease then to consume thyself and me with these 
complaints. Not of my own will do I seek Italy.^® 

Italiam non sponte sequor: this is the secret of the tale. We who, after 
eight centuries of sentimental literature, judge Virgil and his hero in its 
terms, attach far more significance to romantic love, and to extramarital 
relations, than did either Greece or Rome. Marriage was to the ancients a 
union of families rather than of bodies or souls; and the demands of religion 
or fatherland were placed above the rights or whim of the individual. Virgil 
treats Dido sympathetically, and rises to one of his finest passages in telling 
how she flings herself upon a funeral pyre and is burned alive; then he 
follows Aeneas to Italy. 

Landing at Cumae, the Trojans march into Latium and are welcomed by 
its king, Latinus. His daughter Lavinia is betrothed to Turnus, the hand- 
some chief of the neighboring Rutuli. Aeneas alienates her affection and her 
father; Tumus declares war upon him and Latium, and mighty battles ensue. 
To refresh and encourage Aeneas the Cumaean Sibyl takes him through 
the grotto of Lake Avemus into Tartarus. As Virgil writes an Odyssey of 
Aeneas’ wanderings and a short Iliad of his wars, so now he takes a lead from 
Odysseus’ tour of Hades, and becomes in turn an exemplar and guide for 
Dante. Facilis descensus Averm—“^zsy is the descent to Hell”— says Virgil; 



THE GOLDEN AGE 


241 


CHAP. XIl) 

but his hero finds the way tortuous, and the lower world confusingly com- 
plex. There he meets Dido, who scorns his protestations of love; there he 
sees the varied torments with which earthly sin is punished and the prison 
house where suffer, Lucifer-like, rebellious demigods. Then the Sibyl takes 
him through mystic passages to the Blissful Groves where those who led 
good lives bask in green valleys and endless joys. His father Anchiscs, who 
has died en route, expounds to him here the Orphic doctrine of heaven, 
purgatory, and hell, and reveals to him in panoramic vision the future glory 
and heroes of Rome. In a later vision Venus shows him the battle of Actium 
and the triumphs of Augustus. His spirits revived, Aeneas returns to the 
living world, kills Turnus, and scatters death about him with epic hand. 
He marries the shadowy Lavinia, and when her father dies he inherits the 
throne of Latium. Soon afterward he falls in battle and is transported to the 
Elysian Fields. His son Ascanius or lulus builds Alba Longa as the new 
capital of the Latin tribes, and thence his descendants Romulus and Remus 
go forth to establish Rome. 

It seems unmannerly to criticize so gentle a soul as Virgil for all these 
grateful flatteries to his country and his Emperor, or to find flaws in a work 
that perhaps he had never wished to write and never lived to complete. 
Of course it imitates Greek models; so does practically all Roman literature 
except the satire and the essay. The battle scenes are weak echoes of the 
lliacPs clanging frays, and Aurora rises as often as Homer’s rosy-fingered 
Dawn. Naevius, Ennius, and Lucretius lend the poet episodes and phrases, 
sometimes whole lines; and Apollonius of Rhodes, through his Argonautica, 
provides a model for Dido’s tragic love. Such borrowings were judged 
legitimate in Virgil’s as in Shakespeare’s days; all Mediterranean literature 
was viewed as the heritage and storehouse of every Mediterranean mind. 
The mythological background tires us, now that we are making our own; 
but these divine allusions and interpositions were familiar and pleasant even 
to skeptical readers of Roman poetry. M'’e miss in the smooth epic of the 
ailing Virgil the torrential narrative of Homer, the life-and-blood reahty 
that moves the giants of the Iliad or the homely folk of Ithaca. Virgil’s 
story often lags, and his characters are almost all anemic except those whom 
Aeneas abandons or destroys. Dido is a living woman, gracious, subtle, 
passionate; Tumus is a simple and honest warrior, betrayed by Latinus, and 
doomed to an unmerited death by ridiculous gods. After ten cantos of cant 
we resent the “piety” of Aeneas, which leaves him no will of his own, 
excuses his treachery, and brings him success only by supernatural inter- 
vention. We do not enjoy the windy speeches with which he kills good men, 
adding a rhetorical boredom to that competitive perforation which is 
humanity’s final test of truth. 



242 


CAESAR AND CHRIST 


(chap. XII 

To understand and appreciate the Aeneid we must at every turn remind 
ourselves that Virgil was writing not a romance, but a sacred scripture for 
Rome. Not that he offers any clear theology. The gods who pull the strings 
of his drama are as vicious as Homer’s and not as humorously human; 
indeed, all the mischief and suffering in the story are caused not by men 
and women but by deities. Probably Virgil conceived these divinities as 
poetical machinery, symbols of tyrannous circumstance and disruptive 
chance; in general he oscillates between Jove and an impersonal Fate as the 
ruler of all things. He likes the gods of the village and the field better than 
those of Olympus; he loses no opportunity to commemorate them and 
describe their rites; and he wishes that his fellow men could recapture the 
pietas— the reverence toward parents, fatherland, and gods— which was 
nourished by that primeval rural creed. Hen pietas! heu prisca fides! he 
mourns— “alas for the old piety and faith!” But he rejects the traditional 
conception of a Hades in which all the dead bear alike a gloomy fate; he 
plays with Orphic and Pythagorean ideas of reincarnation and a future life, 
and makes as vivid as he can the notion of a rewarding heaven, a cleansing 
purgatory, and a punishing hell. 

The real religion of the Aeneid is patriotism, and its greatest god is Rome. 
The destiny of Rome moves the plot, and all the tribulations of the tale find 
meaning in “the heavy task of establishing the Roman race'’— wit ae iiioHs 
erat Romanam condere gentem. The poet is so proud of the Empire that he 
looks with no envy upon the superior culture of the Greeks. Let other 
peoples transform into living figures marble and bronze, and chart the 
courses of the stars: 

But thou, O Roman, must the peoples rule. 

Thine arts shall be to teach the wavs of peace. 

To spare the humbled, and throw down the proud.^® 

Nor does Virgil resent the death of the Republic; he knows that class war, 
not Caesar, killed it; at every stage of his poem he foreshadows the restorative 
rule of Augustus, hails it as Saturn’s reign returned, and promises him, as 
reward, admission to the company of the gods. No man ever fulfilled a 
literary commission more perfectly. 

Why do we retain a warm affection for this pietistic, moralistic, chauvinis- 
tic, imperialistic propagandist? Partly because the gentleness of his spirit is on 
every page; because we feel that his sympathies have spread from his own 
fair Italy to all men, even to all life. He knows the sufferings of the lowlv and 
the great, the obscene ghastliness of war. the brief mortality that stalks the 
noblest men, the griefs and pains, the lacrbnae rerum, or “tears in things,” 
that mar and accentuate the sunshine of our days. He is not merely imitating 



THE GOLDEN AGE 


243 


CHAP. XIl) 

Lucretius when he writes of “the nightingale mourning beneath the poplar’s 
shade the loss of her young ones, whom some hard plowman has seen and 
tom unfledged from their nest; all night long she cries, and perched on a 
spray, renews her pitiful song, filling the woods with her sad lament.” 
But what draws us back to Virgil again and again is the persistent loveliness 
of his speech. It is not in vain that he pored over every line, “licking it into 
shape as the she-bear does her cubs”; ~~ and only the reader who has tried 
to write can guess the toil that made this narrative so smooth and adorned 
it with so many passages of sonorous melody that every second page cries 
out for quotation, and tempts the tongue. Perhaps the poem is too uniformly 
beautiful; even beauty palls upon us if its eloquence is prolonged. There is 
a delicate feminine charm in Virgil, but seldom the masculine power and 
thought of Lucretius or the surging tide of that “many-billowed sea” called 
Homer. We begin to understand the melancholy ascribed to Virgil when 
we picture him preaching beliefs that he could never recapture, writing for 
ten years an epic whose every episode and line required the effort of artifi- 
cial art, then dying with the haunting thought that he had failed, that no 
spark of spontaneity had set his imagination on fire or spurred his figures 
into life. But over his medium, if not over his subject, the poet won a com- 
plete victory. Artifice has seldom achieved a brighter miracle. 

Two years after his death his executors gave the poem to the world. 
There were some detractors: one critic published an anthology of his defects, 
another listed his pilferings, another printed eight volumes of ResernbluTices 
between lines in Virgil and in earlier poetry.-* But Rome soon forgave this 
literary communism. Horace ranked Virgil fondly with Homer, and schools 
inaugurated nineteen hundred years of memorizing the Aeneid. Plebeian 
and aristocrat mouthed him; artisans and shopkeepers, tombstones and 
scribbled walls, quoted him; temple oracles gave responses through ambigu- 
ous verses of his epic; the custom began— and lasted till the Renaissance— 
of opening Virgil at random and finding some counsel or prophecy in the 
first passage that struck the eye. His fame grew until in the Middle Ages 
he was considered a magician and a saint. Had he not, in the Fourth Ec- 
logue, predicted the confing of the Saviour and, in the Aeneid, described 
Rome as the Holy City, from which the power of rehgion would uplift the 
world? Had he not in that terrible Book VI pictured the Last Judgment, 
the sufferings of the wicked, the cleansing fire of purgatory, the happiness 
of the blessed in paradise? \^irgil too, hke Plato, was mhna naturaliter 
Christiana, despite his pagan gods. Dante loved the elegance of his verse, 
and took him as guide not only through hell and purgatory, but also in the 
art of flowing narrative and beautiful speech. Milton thought of him when 



244 CAESAR AND CHRIST (CHAP. XIl 

writing Paradise Lost and the pompous orations of devils and men. And 
Voltaire, of whom we should have expected a harsher judgment, ranked 
the Aeneid as the finest literary monument left us by antiquity 


IV. HORACE 

One of the pleasantest pictures in the world of letters— where jealousy is 
only less rife than in love— is Virgil introducing Horace to Maecenas. The 
two poets had met in 40 b.c., when Virgil was thirty and Horace twenty- 
five. Virgil opened the doors of Maecenas to him a year later, and all three 
remained fast friends till death. 

In 193 5 Italy celebrated the two thousandth birthday of Quintus Horatius 
Flaccus. He was born in the little town of Venusia, in Apulia. His father 
was an ex-slave who had risen to the dignity of a tax collector- or, some 
said, a fishmonger.-® Flaccus meant flap-eared; Horatius was probably the 
name of the master whom the father had served. Somehow the freedman 
prospered, sent Quintus to Rome for rhetoric, and to Athens for philosophy. 
There the youth joined the army of Brutus, and received command of a 
legion. It was dulce et decoruin pro patria mori—'sv/ttt and honorable, to 
die for one’s country”; but Horace, who often imitated Archilochus, 
dropped his shield in the midst of battle and took to his heels. After the war 
was over he found himself shorn of all property and patrimony, and “bare- 
faced poverty drove me to writing verses.” Actually, however, he but- 
tered his bread by being a quaestor’s clerk. 

He was short and stout, proud and shy, disliking the common crowd and 
yet not having the garb or means to move in circles whose education might 
equal his own. Too cautious to marry, he contented himself with courtesans 
who may have been real or may have been forms of poetic license invented 
to demonstrate maturity. He wrote of prostitutes with scholarly restraint 
and intricate prosody, and thought he deserved much for not seducing 
married women.-* Too poor to ruin himself sexually, he took to books and 
composed Greek and Latin lyrics in the most recondite of Greek meters. 
Virgil saw one of these poems and praised it to Maecenas. The kindly epi- 
cure was complimented by Horace’s stammering timidity and found a sly 
relish in his sophisticated thought. In 37 Maecenas took Virgil, Horace, and 
some others on a jaunt by canal boat, stagecoach, litter, and foot across 
Italy to Brundisium. Shortly afterward he introduced Horace to Octavian, 
who proposed that Horace should become his secretary. The poet excused 
himself, having no passion for work. In 34 Maecenas gave him a house and 
income-producing farm in the Sabine valley of Ustica, some forty-five miles 



THE GOLDEN AGE 


CHAP. XIl) 


245 


from Rome. Horace was now free to live in the city or the country, and 
to write as authors dream of writing— with lazy leisure and laborious care.* 
For a while he stayed in Rome, enjoying the life of an amused spectator 
of the hurrying world. He mingled with all ranks, studying the types that 
made up Rome, contemplating with clinical pleasure the follies and vices of 
the capital. He pictured some of these types in nvo books of Satires (34 and 
30 B.c.) modeled at first on Lucilius and later in a milder and more tolerant 
strain. He called these poems sermones— not by any means sermons, but 
informal conversations, sometimes intimate dialogues, in almost colloquial 
hexameters; he confessed that they were prose in everything but meter, “for 
you would not call one a poet who writes, as I do, lines more akin to prOse.” 
In these racy verses we meet the living men and women of Rome and hear 
them talking as Romans talked: not the shepherds, peasants, and heroes of 
Virgil, nor the legendary lechers and heroines of Ovid, but the saucy slave, 
the vain poet, the pompous lecturer, the greedy philosopher, the gabbing 
bore, the eager Semite, the businessman, the statesman, the streettvalker: 
this at last, we feel, is Rome. With homicidal playfulness Horace lays down 
for the hunter of legacies the rules for success in that ghoulish game.^® He 
laughs at the gourmets who feast on delicacies and limp with gout.®® He 
reminds the laudator teiitporis acti—tht “praiser of times past”— that “if some 
god were for taking you back to those days you would refuse every time”; 
the chief charm of the past is that we know we need not live it again. He 
wonders, like Lucretius, at the restless souls who in the city long for the 
country, and there long for the city; who can never enjoy what they have 
because there is someone who has more; who, not content with their wives, 
hanker with too great and yet too little imagination for the charms of other 
women who have in turn become prose to other men. Money-madness, 
he concludes, is the basic disease of Rome. He asks the itching gold-seeker, 
“Why do you laugh at Tantalus, from whose thirsty lips the water always 
moves away? Change the name, and the story is about you”: nnitato tiotnine, 
de te fabtda narratur.^- He satirizes himself, too: he represents his slave 
telling him to his face that he, the moralist, is hot-tempered, never knows 
his own mind or purpose, and is the menial of his passions like anybody else. 
It is doubtless to himself, as well as to others, that he recommends the golden 
mean, aurea mediocritas; est viodiis in rebus, he says— “there’s a limit, 
a measure in things,” which the intelligent man will neither fall short of 


* Horace’s estate, unearthed in 1932, turned out to be a spacious mansion, 363 by 142 feet, 
with twenty-four rooms, three bathing pools, several mosaic floors, and a large formal garden 
surrounded by a covered and enclosed portico. Beyond this was an extensive farm, worked by 
eight slaves and five families of leasehold coloni.^^^ 



246 CAESAR AND CHRIST (cHAP. XII 

nor exceed. In opening his second series of Satires he complains to a friend 
that the first group were criticized as too savage and too weak. He asks 
advice and is told, “Take a rest.” “What?” the poet objects, “not write verses 
at all?” “Yes.” “But I can’t sleep.” 

He would have done well to take the advice for a time. His next publica- 
tion, the Epodes, or “Refrains” (29 b.c.), is the least worthy of his works: 
harsh and coarse, ungenerous, tastelessly and bisexually obscene, forgiv- 
able only as an experiment in the iambic meters of Archilochus. Perhaps his 
disgust with the “smoke and wealth and noise of Rome” had mounted 
to bitterness; he could not bear the pressure of the “ignorant and evil- 
thinking crowd.” He pictures himself jostled and jostling in the human 
flotsam of the capital, and cries out: “O rural home! when shall I behold 
you? When shall I be able, now with the books of the ancients, now with 
sleep and idle hours, to quaff sweet forgetfulness of life’s cares? When 
will beans, the very brethren of Pythagoras, be served to me, and greens well 
larded with fat bacon? O nights and feasts divine! ” His stays in Rome be- 
came shorter; he spent so much time in his Sabine villa that his friends, 
even Maecenas, complained that he had cut them out of his life. After 
the heat and dust of the city he found the pure air, the peaceful routine, 
and the simple workmen on his farm a cleansing delight. His health was 
poor, and like Augustus he lived for the most part on a vegetarian diet. “My 
stream of pure water, my few acres of w’oodland, my sure trust in a crop 
of com, bring me' more blessing than the lot of the dazzling lord of fertile 
Africa.” In him, as in the other Augustan poets, the love of country life 
finds a warm expression rare in the hterature of Greece. Beatus ille qui 
procul negotiis— 

Happy is he who far from business cares. 

Even as the oldest race of men. 

Tills with his own oxen his patrimonial fields. 

Freed from every debt. . . . 

How sweet it is to lie under the ancient ilex tree. 

Or on the matted grass. 

While the stream flows on between high banks. 

And the woodland birds sing. 

And springs with leaping waters plash. 

Inviting to soft sleep! 

It should be added, however, that these lines are put with Horatian irony 
into the mouth of a city moneylender, who, having uttered them, at once 
forgets them and loses himself in his coins. 

Probably it was in those quiet haunts that he labored with “painstaking 



THE GOLDEN AGE 


CHAP. XIl) 


247 


happiness ”— felicitas *— over those odes by which he knew that his 
name would live or die. He was tired of hexameters, the endless march of 
their measured feet, the sharp caesura cleaving the line like some inexorable 
guillotine. He had enjoyed in his youth the subtle and vivacious meters of 
Sappho, Alcaeus, Archilochus, and Anacreon; he proposed now to trans- 
plant these “sapphics” and “alcaics,” these iambics and hendecasyllabics, 
into Roman lyric form, to express his thoughts on love and wine, religion and 
the state, life and death, in stanzas refreshingly new, epigrammatically com- 
pact, modeled for music, and teasing the mind with the complex skein of 
their weaving. He did not intend them for simple or hurried souls; indeed, 
he warned such away by the bluenosed opening of the third group; 

Odi profanum vulgus et arceo. 

Favete linguis. Carmina non prius 
audita Musarum sacerdos 
virginibus puerisque canto: — 

“I hate and shun the profane crowd. Be silent! I, priest of the Muses, sing 
for maidens and youths songs never heard before.” 

The maidens, if they had cared to tread and skip their way through 
Horace’s playful inversions of speech and desire, might have been pleasantly 
.shocked by the chiseled epicureanism of these odes. The poet pictures the 
pleasures of friendship, eating and drinking, and making love; one would 
hardly surmise from such lauds that their author was a recluse who ate little 
and drank less. AVhy disturb ourselves with Roman politics and distant wars? 
he asks (anticipating the reader of these pages). Why plan so carefully a 
future whose sh^pe will laugh at our plans? Youth and beauty touch us and 
flit away; let us enjoy them now, “reclining under the pine trees, our gray 
locks garlanded with roses and perfumed with Syrian nard.” Even as we 
speak, envious time runs out; seize the occasion, carpe diem, “snatch the 
day.” He intones a litany of loose ladies whom he claims to have loved: 
Lalage, Glycera, Neaera, Inacha, Cinara, Candia, Lyce, Pyrrha, Lydia, 
Tyndaris, Chloe, Phyllis, Myrtale. We need not believe all his protestations 
of guilt; these were literary exercises almost compulsory among the poets 
of the day; the same ladies or names had served other pens. The now virtuous 
Augustus was not deceived by these iambic fornications; he was pleased to 
find, among them, stately praises of his reign, his victories, his aides, his moral 
reforms, and the Augustan peace. Horace’s famous drinking son^—Ntmc 
est bibeyidiim was composed on receipt of the news that Cleopatra was 
dead and Egypt taken; even his sophisticated soul thrilled at the thought of 


* This is the curious and happy phrase applied to Horace by Petronius.'*! 


CAESAR AND CHRIST 


248 


(chap. XII 


the Empire victorious and expanding as never before. He warned his readers 
that new laws could not take the place of old morals; mourned the spread 
of luxury and adultery, of frivolity and cynical unbelief. “Alas!” he says, 
referring to the latest war, “the shame of our scars and crimes, and of 
brothers slain! What have we of this hard generatioi^ shrunk from? What 
iniquity have we left untouched?”*® Nothing could save Rome but a 
return to the simphcity and steadfastness of ancient ways. The skeptic who 
found it difficult to believe anything bent his hoary head before the ancient 
altars, acknowledged that without a myth the people perish, and lent his 
pen graciously to the ailing gods. 

There is nothing in the world’s literature quite like these poems— delicate 
and yet powerful, exquisite and masculine, subtle and intricate, hiding their 
art with perfect art, and their toil with seeming ease. This is music in another 
scale than Virgil’s, less melodious and more intellectual, meant not for youths 
and maidens but for artists and philosophers. There is rarely any passion 
here, or enthusiasm, or “fine writing”; the diction is simple even where the 
sentence stands on its head. But in the greater odes there is a pride and 
majesty of thought, as if an emperor were speaking and not in letters but 
in bronze: 


Exegi monumentum acre perennius 
regalique situ pyramidum altius, 
quod non imber edax, non Aquilo impotens 
possit diruere, aut innumerabilis 
annorum series et fuga temporum. 

Non omnis moriar.*® ^ 

I have raised a monument more lasting than bronze. 

Loftier than the royal peak of pvramids; 

No biting storm can bring it down. 

No impotent north wind, not the unnumbered series 
Of the years, nor the swift course of time. 

I shall not wholly die. 

The slandered crowd ignored the Odes, the critics denounced them as 
tiresome artifice, the puritans declaimed against the songs of love. Augustus 
pronounced the poems immortal, asked for a fourth group that would cele- 
brate the exploits of Drusus and Tiberius in Germany, and chose Horace 
to write the carmen saeculare for the Secular Games. Horace complied, but 
without inspiration. The effort of the Odes had exhausted him. In his final 
work he relaxed into the conversational hexameters of the Satires, and wrote 
his Epistles as from an easy chair. He had always wanted to be a philosopher; 
now he abandoned himself to wisdom, even while remaining a causeiir. Since 



CHAP. XII ) 


THE GOLDEN AGE 


249 

a philosopher is a dead poet and a dying theologian, Horace, old at forty-five, 
was ripe to discuss God and man, morals and literature and art. 

The most fiamous of these letters, named by later critics “The Art of 
Poetry,” was addressed Ad Pisoiies— to some uncertain members of the 
Piso clan; it was no formal treatise, but a bit of friendly advice on how to 
write. Choose a subject suited to your powers, Horace says; beware of 
laboring like a mountain and producing a mouse.^^ The ideal book is that 
which at the same time instructs and entertains; “he who has mingled the 
useful with the pleasant wins every vote”— tidit pimctiun qui miscuit 
utile dulcid^ Avoid words that are new, obsolete, or “sesquipedalian”— 
foot-and-a-half words. Be as brief as clarity allows. Go straight to the 
heart of the matter— in medias res. In writing poetry do not imagine that 
emotion is everything. It is true that you must feel an emotion yourself if 
you wish the reader to feel it («' vis me flere, dolendimi est privmtn ipsi 
tibi) But art is not feeling; it is form (here again is the challenge of the 
classic to the romantic style).* To achieve form, study the Greeks day and 
night; erase almost as much as you write; delete every “purple patch” 
(purpureus pannus) ; submit your work to a competent critic, and beware of 
your friends. If it survives all this, put it away for eight years; if then you 
do not perceive the uses of oblivion, publish it, but remember that it can 
never be recalled except by time: verba volant, scripta manent. If you write 
drama let the action, not your words, tell the story and delineate the char- 
acters. Do not represent horror on the stage. Obey the unities of action, 
time, and place: let the story be one and occur within a brief time in one 
place. Study life and philosophy, for without observation and understand- 
ing even a perfect style is an empty thing. Sapere atide: dare to know. 

Horace himself had obeyed all these precepts but one— he had not learned 
to weep. Because his feelings were too thin, or had been stifled into silence, 
he seldom rose to the high art that gives form to sincere sympathy, or to 
“emotion remembered in tranquillity.” He was too urbane. Nil admirari, “to 
marvel at nothing,” was poor advice; to the poet ever^nhing should be a 
miracle, even when, like the sunrise or a tree, it greets him every day. Horace 
obsen^ed life, but not too deeply; he studied philosophy, but kept so 
persistently an “even mind” that only his Odes rise above a “golden me- 
diocrity.” He honored virtue like a Stoic, and respected pleasure like 
an Epicurean. “Who, then, is free?” he asks, and answers, like Zeno, “The 
wise man, he who is lord over himself, whom neither poverty nor death 

* Almost neglected in the Middle Ages, Horace came into his own in the seventeenth and 
eighteenth centuries, the age of modem classicism, when every statesman and pamphleteer, 
above all in England, turned the poet’s phrases into prose cliches. BoUeau’s L’Art poetique 
revived Horace’s Ad Phones and formed and chilled the French drama till Hugo; Pope’s 
Essay on Criticism attempted a similar refrigeration in England, but was thawed by Byron’s fire. 



CAESAR AND CHRIST 


250 


(chap. XII 


nor bonds affright, who defies his passions, scorns ambition, and is in him- 
self a whole.” One of his noblest poems sings a Stoic strain: 


lustum et tenacem propositi viri 
si fractus inlabatur orbis 
impavidum ferient ruinae— 


“If a man is just and resolute, the whole world may break and fall upon him 
and find him, in the ruins, undismayed.” But despite all this he calls him- 
self, with engaging honesty, “a pig from Epicurus’ sty.” Like Epicurus 
he placed more store on friendship than on love; like Virgil he lauded the 
reforms of Augustus, and remained a bachelor. He did his best to preach 
religion, but he had none. Death, he felt, ends all.®® 

His last days were clouded with this thought. He had his share of pains- 
stomach trouble, rheumatism, and much else. “The years as they pass,” he 
mourned, “rob us of all joys, one by one.” And to another friend: “Alas, 
O Postumus, the fleeting years slip by; nor shall piety hold back our wrinkles, 
or pressing age, or indomitable death.” He recalled how, in his first satire, 
he had hoped, when his rime came, to quit life contentedly, “like a guest who 
has had his fill.” Now he told himself: “You have played enough, eaten 
enough, drunk enough; it is time for you to go.” ®® Fifteen years have passed 
since he had told Maecenas that he would not long survive the financier.®^ 
In 8 B.c. Maecenas died, and a few months later Horace followed him. He left 
his property to the Emperor, and was laid to rest near Maecenas’ tomb. 


V. LIVY 

Augustan prose achieved no triumphs equal to those of Augustan verse. 
Oratory subsided as the making of laws and decisions passed in reality if not 
in form from Senate and assembhes to the secret chambers of the prince. 
Scholarship continued its quiet course, sheltered from present storms by its 
ghostly interests. It was only in the writing of history that the age achieved 
a masterpiece in prose. 

Bom in Patavium (Padua) in 59, Titus Livius came to the capital, de- 
voted himself to rhetoric and philosophy, and gave the last forty j ears of 
his life (23 B.C.— A.D. 17) to writing a history of Rome. That is all we know 
of him; “Rome’s historian has no history.” ®® Like Virgil he came from 
the region of the Po, retained the old virtues of simplicity and piety, and— 
perhaps through the pathos of distance— developed a passionate reverence 
for the Eternal City. His work was planned on a majestic scale and was 
completed; of its 142 “books” only thirty-five have come down to us; as 



THE GOLDEN AGE 


CHAP. XIl) 


251 


these fill six volumes we may judge the magnitude of the whole. Apparently 
it was published in parts, each with a separate title, and all under the general 
heading, Ab urbe condita—"¥vom the city’s foundation.” Augustus could 
forgive its republican sentiments and heroes, since its religious, moral, and 
patriotic tone accorded well with the Emperor’s policies. He took Livy into 
his friendship and encouraged him as a prose \firgil who was beginning 
where the poet had left off. Halfway on his long journey from 753 to 9 b.c., 
Livy thought of stopping, on the ground that he had already won lasting 
fame; he went on, he says, because he found himself restless when he ceased 
to write.®* 

Roman historians looked upon history as a hybrid child of rhetoric and 
philosophy: if we may believe them, they wrote to illustrate ethical pre- 
cepts with eloquent narrative— ta adorn a moral with a tale. Livy was trained 
as an orator; finding oratory censured and dangerous, “he took to history,” 
says Taine, “so that he could still be an orator.” He began with a stem 
preface, denouncing the immorality, luxury, and effeminacy of the age; he 
buried himself in the past, he tells us, to forget the eyils of his time, “when 
we can bear neither our diseases nor their remedies.” He would set forth, 
through history, the yirtues that had made Rome great— the unity and holi- 
ness of family life, the pietas of children, the sacred relation of men with 
the gods at eyery step, the sanctity of the solemnly pledged word, the stoic 
self-control and gravitas. He would make that stoic Rome so noble that 
its conquest of the Mediterranean would appear as a moral imperative, a 
divine order and law cast over the chaos of the East and the barbarism of 
the West. Polybius had ascribed Rome’s triumph to its form of government; 
Livy would make it a corollary of the Roman character. 

The chief faults of his work derive from this moral intent. He gives many 
signs of being privately a rationalist; but his respect for religion is so great 
that he accepts almost any superstition, and litters his pages with omens, 
portents, and oracles, until we feel that here too, as in Virgil, the real actors 
are the gods. He expresses his doubts concerning the myths of early Rome; 
he gives the less credible ones with a smile; but as he goes on he ceases to 
distinguish legend from history, follows his predecessors with scant discrimi- 
nation, and accepts at their face value the laudatory romances that earher 
historians had composed to ennoble their ancestry.®® He rarely consults 
original sources or monuments, and never bothers to visit the scene of an 
action. Sometimes he paraphrases Polybius for pages.®^ He adopts the old 
priestly method of annals, narrating events by consulates; consequently 
there is in him, aside from his moral theme, no tracing of causes, but only a 
succession of brilliant episodes. He makes no distinction between the rude 
patres of the early Republic and the aristocracy of his day, nor between the 



CAESAR AND CHRIST 


252 


(chap. XII 


virile plebs that had created Roman democracy and the venal mob that had 
destroyed it. His prejudices are always patrician. 

The patriotic pride that makes E.ome forever right in Livy was the secret 
of his greatness. It gave him an enduring happiness in his long toil; seldom 
has any writer executed so vast a plan so faithfully. It gave his readers, and 
still gives us, a sense of Rome’s grandeur and destiny. This imperial con- 
sciousness contributed to the energy of Livy’s style, the vigor of his char- 
acterizations, the brilliance and power of his descriptions, the majestic march 
of his prose. The invented speeches in which his history abounds are master- 
pieces of oratory, and became models for the schools. The charm of good 
manners pervades the work: Livy never shouts, never severely condemns; 
his sympathy is broader than his scholarship and deeper than his thought. 
It fails him forgivably when he comes to Hannibal; but he atones with a 
sweep and splendor of narrative that reaches its zenith in describing the 
Second Punic War. 

His readers did not mind his inaccuracies or his bias. They liked his style 
and story, and gloried in the vivid picture that he had drawn of their past. 
They took the Ab urbe condita as a prose epic, one of the noblest monu- 
ments of the Augustan age and mood. From that time onward it was Livy’s 
book that would color for eighteen centuries men’s conception of Rome’s 
history and character. Even readers in subject lands were impressed by 
this massive record of unprecedented conquests and titanic deeds. The 
younger Pliny tells of a Spaniard who was so moved by Livy’s work that he 
traveled from far Cadiz to Rome in the hope of seeing him. Having accom- 
plished his purpose and tendered his worship, he neglected other sights and 
returned content to his Atlantic home.®® 


VI. THE AMOROUS REVOLT 

Meanwhile poetry continued to flourish, but not quite on the lines of 
Augustus’ desire. Only supreme artists like Virgil or Horace can produce 
good verse to governmental specifications; greater men would refuse, lesser 
men are unable to comply. Of the three major sources of poetry— religion, 
nature, love— two had been brought under imperial sway; the third re- 
mained lawless, even in Horace’s Odes. Now, mildly in Tibullus and Proper- 
tius, recklessly in Ovid, poetry escaped from the bureau of propaganda 
and staged a rebelhon that proceeded with mounting gaiety to a tragic end. 

Albius Tibullus (54-19), like Virgil, lost his ancestral lands when the 
Civil War reached the httle town of Peduni-near Tibur-that had seen 
his birth. Messala rescued him from poverty and took him in his tr ain to 



THE GOLDEN AGE 


CHAP. XIl) 


253 


the East, but Tibullus fell ill on the way and returned to Rome. He was 
happy to be free from war and politics; now he could give himself to 
genderless love and the polishing of elegiac verse in the manner of the 
Alexandrian Greeks. To Delia (otherwise unknown, and perhaps one name 
for many) he addressed the usual supplications, “sitting like a gatekeeper 
[ianitor] before her stubborn doors” and reminding her, as so many maids 
have been reminded, that youth comes but once and soon steals away. It 
did not disturb him that Delia was married; he put the husband to sleep with 
undiluted wine— but fumed when her new lover played the same trick upon 
him.^® These ancient themes might not have harassed Augustus; what made 
Tibullus, Propertius, and Ovid really disagreeable to a government that was 
finding it hard to enlist recruits for the army was the persuasive anti- 
militarism of this love-loose set. Tibullus laughs at warriors who forage for 
death when they might have been seducing women. He mourns for the 
age of Saturn, when, he imagines, 

there were no armies, no hatred, and no war. . . . There was no 
war when men drank from wooden cups. . . . Give me but love, 
and let others go to war. . . . The hero is he whom, when his chil- 
dren have been begotten, old age overtakes in his humble cottage. 

He follows his sheep, his son follows the lambs, while the good wife 
heats the water for his weary limbs. So let me live till the white hairs 
glisten on my head, and I tell in niy old man’s fashion of the days 
gone by.'^^ 

Se.xtus Propertius (49-15) sang less simply and tenderly, and with more 
learned ornaments, the same idyl of peaceful lechery. Bom in Umbria, 
educated in Rome, he soon lapsed into verse; and though few readers could 
fetch his thought from the wells of his pedantry, Maecenas took him into 
his circle on the Esquihne. He describes with pride and pleasure the dinners 
there on the banks of the Tiber, when he would drink the wine of Lesbos 
in cups chiseled by great artists, and, “seated as on a throne amid merry 
women,” would watch the vessels gliding by on the river below.'^" To please 
his patron and his prince Propertius now and then plucked his lyre in praise 
of war; but to his mistress Cynthia he sang another tune: “Why should I 
raise sons for Parthian triumphs? No child of ours shall be a soldier.” 
Not all the martial glory in the world, he assured her, could equal one night 
with Cynthia.'^^ 

Of all these epicureans, light of heart and head, who spent their lives 
climbing and descending the mount of Venus, Publius Ovidius Naso was 
the happy model and poet laureate. Sulmo (Soloma) saw his birth (43 b.c.) 
in a pleasant valley of the Apennines some ninety miles east of Rome; how 



CAESAR AND CHRIST 


254 


(chap, xn 


beautiful, from the cold exile of his later years, would seem Sulmo’s vine- 
yards, olive groves, cornfields, and streams! His rich middle-class father 
sent him to Rome to study law, and was shocked to hear that the boy wished 
to be a poet; he held up to the lad the awful fate of Homer, who, according 
to the best authorities, had died blind and poor. So warned, Ovid managed 
to rise to the post of a judge in the praetorial courts. Then, to his father’s 
dismay, he refused to run for the quaestorship (from which he would have 
emerged a senator) , and retired to the cultivation of literature and love. He 
pleaded that he could not help being a poet; “I lisped in numbers and the 
numbers came.” 

Ovid traveled leisurely to Athens, the Near East, and Sicily, and, return- 
ing, joined the loosest circles in the capital. Possessed of charm, wit, educa- 
tion, and money, he was able to open all doors. He married twice in early 
manhood, was twice divorced, and then grazed for a time in public pas- 
tures. “Let the past please others,” he sang; “I congratulate myself on being 
bom into this age, whose morals are so congenial to my own.” He laughed 
at the Aeneid, and merely concluded from it that since the son of Venus had 
founded Rome, it should, if only out of piety, become the city of love.^^ He 
lost his head to a pretty courtesan, whose anonymity or multiplicity he 
hides under the name of Corinna. His racy couplets about her had no trouble 
in finding a publisher; under the title of Amoves they were soon (14 b.c.) 
on the hps and lyres of youthful Rome. “On every hand people want to 
know who is this Corinna that I sing about.” He mystified them, in a 
second series of Amoves, by writing a pronunciamento of promiscuity: 

It is no fixed beauty that calls my passion forth; there are a hundred 
causes to keep me always in love. If it is some fair one with modest 
eyes downcast upon her lap, I am aflame, and her innocence is my en- 
snaring; if it is some saucy jade, I am smitten because she is not rustic 
simple, and gives me hope of enjoying her supple embrace on the 
soft couch. If she seems austere, and affects the rigid Sabine dame, I 
judge she would yield, but is deep in her conceit. If you are versed in 
books you win me by your rare accomplishments. . . . One treads 
softly, and I fall in love with her step; another is hard, but can be 
softened by the touch of love. Because this one sings sweetly ... I 
would snatch kisses as she sings; this other runs with nimble fingers 
over the complaining strings— who could but fall in love with such 
cunning hands? Another takes me by her movement, swaying her 
arms in rhythm and curving her tender side with supple art— to say 
naught of myself, who take fire from every cause; put Hippolytus in 
my place, and he will be Priapus! . . . Tall and short are after the 
wish of my heart; I am undone by both. . . . My love is candidate 
for the favors of them all.^® 



THE GOLDEN AGE 


CHAP, XIl) 


255 


Ovid apologizes for not chanting the glory of war; Cupid came and stole 
a foot from his verse and left it lame.®® He wrote a lost play, Medea, which 
was well received, but for the most part he preferred “the slothful shade 
of V enus,” and was content to be called “the well-known singer of his worth- 
less ways.” Here are the lays of the troubadours a thousand years before- 
time, addressed like them to married ladies, and making flirtation the main 
business of life. Ovid instructs Corinna how to communicate with him by 
signs as she lies on her husband’s couch.®” He assures her of his eternal 
fidelity, his strictly monogamous adultery: “I am no fickle philanderer, 
not one of those who love a hundred women at a time.” At last he wins 
her and intones a paean of victory. He commends her for having denied 
him so long, and advises her to deny him again, now and then, so that he 
may love her forever. He quarrels with her, strikes her, repents, laments, 
and loves her more madly than before. Romeo-like he begs the dawn to delay, 
and hopes some blessed wind will break the axle of Aurora’s car. Corinna 
deceives him in his turn, and he is furious on finding that she holds her 
favors insufficiently rewarded by the homage of his v^erse. She kisses him 
into forgiveness, but he cannot pardon the new skill of her loving; some 
other master has been teaching her.®* A few pages later he is “in love with 
two maids at once, each beautiful, each tasteful in dress and accomplish- 
ment.” ®^ Soon, he fears, his simultaneous duties will undo him; but he 
will be happy to die on the field of love.®® 

These poems were tolerantly received by Roman society four years after 
the passing of the Julian reform laws. Great Senatorial families like the 
Fabii, the Corvini, the Pomponii continued to entertain Ovid in their homes. 
Buoyant with success, the poet issued a manual of seduction called Ars 
cnnatoria (2 b.c.). “I have been appointed by Venus,” he says, “as tutor to 
tender love.” ®® He chastely warns readers that his precepts must be applied 
only to courtesans and slaves; but his pictures of whispered confidences, 
secret assignations, billets-doux, raillery and wit, deceived husbands, and 
resourceful handmaids suggest the middle and upper classes of Rome. Lest 
his lessons should prove too apt, he added another treatise, Reinedia cnnoris, 
on curing love. The best remedy is hard work; next, hunting; third, absence; 
“it is also useful to surprise your lady in the morning, before she has com- 
pleted her toilette.” Finally, to make the balance even, he wrote De inedi- 
cctmina faciei fevnnineae, a metrical manual of cosmetics, pilfered from the 
Greeks. These little volumes sold so well that Ovid soared to heights of 
insolent fame. “So long as I am celebrated all the world over, it matters not 
to me what one or two pettifoggers say about me.” He did not know that 
one of these pettifoggers was Augustus, that the Prince resented his poems 



256 CAESAR AND CHRIST (CHAP. XII 

as an insult to the Julian laws, and would not forget the insult when imperial 
scandal should touch the poet’s careless head. 

About the third year of our era Ovid married a third time. His new wife 
belonged to one of the most distinguished families in Rome. Now forty-sLx, 
the poet settled down to domestic hfe and seems to have lived in mutual faith 
and happiness with Fabia. Age did to him what law could not; it cooled his 
fires and made his poetry respectable. In the Heroides he told again the love 
stories of famous women— Penelope, Phaedra, Dido, Ariadne, Sappho, Helen, 
Hero; told them, perhaps, at too great length, for repetition can make even 
love a bore. Startling, however, is a sentence in which Phaedra expresses 
Ovid’s philosophy; “Jove decreed that virtue is whatever brings us pleas- 
ure.” ®“ About A.D. 7 the poet published his greatest work, the Metmnor- 
phoses. These fifteen “books” recounted in engaging hexameters the 
renowned transformations of inanimate objects, animals, mortals, and gods. 
Since almost everything in Greek and Roman legend changed its form, the 
scheme permitted Ovid to range through the whole realm of classical 
mythology from the creation of the world to the deification of Caesar. 
These are the old tales that until a generation ago were de rigiienr in every 
college, and whose memory has not yet been erased by the revolution of our 
time: Phaethon’s chariot, Pyramus and Thisbe, Perseus and Andromeda, 
the Rape of Proserpine, Arethusa, Medea, Daedalus and Icarus, Baucis and 
Philemon, Orpheus and Eurydice, Atalanta, Venus and Adonis, and many 
more; here is the treasury from which a hundred thousand poems, paintings, 
and statues have taken their themes. If one must still learn the old myths there 
is no more painless way than by reading this kaleidoscope of men and gods— 
stories told with skeptical humor and amorous bent, and worked up with 
such patient art as no mere trifler could ever have achieved. Little wonder 
that at the end the confident poet announced his own immortality: per 
saecula omnia vivam~'\ shall live forever.” 

He had hardly written the words when news came that Augustus had 
banished him to cold and barbarous Tomi on the Black Sea— even today 
unalluring as Constanta. It was a blow for which the poet, rounding fifty- 
one, was wholly unprepared. He had just composed, toward the close of the 
Metamorphoses, an elegant tribute to the Emperor, whose statesmanship he 
now recognized as the source of that peace, security, and luxury which 
Ovid’s generation had enjoyed. He had half completed, under the title of 
Fasti, an almost pious poem celebrating the religious feasts of the Roman 
year. In these verses he was on the wav to making an epic out of a calendar, 
for he applied to the tales of the old religion, and to the honoring of its 
shrines and gods, the same lucid facility, delicacy of word and phrase, and 
even flow of racy narrative that he had devoted to Greek mythology and 



THE GOLDEN AGE 


CHAP. XIl) 


257 


Roman love. He had hoped to dedicate the work to Augustus as a contribu- 
tion to the religious restoration and as an apologetic palinode to the faith 
he once had scorned. 

The Emperor gave no reason for his edict, and no one today can fathom 
its causes confidently. He offered some hint, however, by at the same time 
banishing his granddaughter Julia, and ordering that Ovid’s works should 
be removed from the public libraries. The poet had apparently played some 
role in Julia’s misconduct— whether as witness, accomplice, or principal. 
He himself declared that he was punished for “an error” and his poems, 
and implied that he had been the unwilling observer of some indecent scene.®® 
He was given the remaining months of the year (a.d. 8) to arrange his affairs. 
The decree was relegatio, softer than exile in allowing him to retain his 
property, harsher in commanding him to stay in one city. He burned his 
manuscripts of the Metamorphoses, but some readers had made copies, and 
preserved them. Most of his friends avoided him;®^ a few dared the light- 
ning by staying with him till his departure; and his wife, who remained 
behind at his bidding, supported him with affection and loyalty. Otherwise 
Rome took no notice as the bard of its joys sailed out of Ostia on the long 
voyage from everything that he had loved. The sea was rough nearly all 
the days of that trip, and the poet thought once that the waves would engulf 
the vessel. When he saw Tomi he regretted that he had survived, and gave 
himself over to grief. 

On the voyage he had begun those verses which we know as T ristia, 
“Sorrows.” Now he continued them, and sent them to his wife, his daughter, 
his stepdaughter, and his friends. Probably the sensitive Roman exaggerated 
the horrors of his new home: a treeless rock where nothing would grow, 
and yet shut out from the sun by the Euxine mists; the cold so bitter that in 
some years the snow remained all summer long; the Black Sea stiff with ice 
through gloomy winters, and the Danube so frozen that it offered no bar 
to the raids of hinterland barbarians upon the city’s mixture of knife-wearing 
Getae and half-breed Greeks. W'hen he thought of Roman skies and Sulmo’s 
fields his heart broke, and his poetry, still beautiful in form and phrase, took 
on a depth of feeling that it had never fathomed before. 

These Tristia, and the poetic letters to his friends Ex Ponto— ‘From the 
Pontus” or Black Sea— have nearly all the charms of his greater works. A 
simple vocabulary that made him a pleasure even in school, scenes vividly 
realized by insight and imagery, characters brought to life by touches of 
psychological subtlety, phrases compact with experience or thought,* an 


* E.g., video meViora prohoque, deteriora seqttor—“'\ see and approve the better, I follow the 
worse ; est deiis hi nobis agitmte caleschmts illo—'iheie is a god in us, and by his action we 
have the warmth of life.” 



258 CAESAR AND CHRIST ( CHAP. XII 

unfailing grace of speech and flowing ease of line; all these stayed with him 
in his exile, attended by a seriousness and tenderness whose absence makes 
the earlier poems unworthy of a man. Strength of character never came to 
him; as once he had spoiled his verse with superficial sensuality, so now he 
flooded his lines with tears and suppliant adulation of the Prince. 

He envied these poems which could go to Rome. “Go, my book, and in 
my name greet the places I love” and “the dear soil of my native land”;®® 
perhaps, he tells it, some brave friend will hand it to a relenting emperor. In 
every letter he still hopes for pardon, or pleads for at least some milder home. 
He thinks each day of his wife and calls her name in the night; he prays that 
he may kiss her whitened hairs before he dies.®® But no pardon came. After 
nine years of exile the broken man of sixty welcomed death. His bones, as 
he had begged, were brought to Italy and buried near the capital. 

His prediction of lasting fame was justified by time. His hold on the 
Middle Ages rivaled Virgil’s; his Aletamorphoses and Heroides became rich 
sources of medieval romance; Boccaccio and Tasso, Chaucer and Spenser, 
drew upon him without stint; and the painters of the Renaissance had a 
treasure trove of subjects in his sensuous verse. He was the great romanticist 
of a classic age. 

With his passing ended one of the great flowering epochs in the history 
of letters. The Augustan was not a supreme literary age, like the Periclean or 
Elizabethan; even at its best there is in its prose a pompous rhetoric, and in 
its verse a formal perfection, that seldom come from soul to soul. We find 
no Aeschylus here, no Euripides, no Socrates, not even a Lucretius or a 
Cicero. Imperial patronage inspired and nourished, repressed and narrowed, 
the literature of Rome. An aristocratic age— like that of Augustus, or 
Louis XIV, or eighteenth-century England— exalts moderation and good 
taste and tends in letters to a “classic” style in which reason and form dom- 
inate feeling and life. Such literature is more finished and less powerful, 
more mature and less influential, than the literature of passionately creative 
periods or minds. But within the classic range this age deserved the com- 
pliment of its name. Never had sober judgment found expression in such 
perfect art; even the madcap revelry of Ovid was cooled into a classic mold. 
In him and Virgil and Horace the Latin language as a poetic medium 
reached its zenith. It would never be so rich and resonant, so subtle and 
compact, so phant and melodious again. 



CHAPTER XIII 


The Other Side of Monarchy 

A.D. 14-96* 


I. TIBERIUS 

W HEN great men stoop to sentiment the world grows fonder of them; 

but when sentiment governs policy empires totter. Augustus had 
chosen Tiberius wisely, but too late. When Tiberius was saving the state 
with patient generalship the Emperor had almost loved him. “Farewell,” 
one of his letters ended, “most agreeable of men . . . most valiant of men, 
most conscientious of commanders.” ^ Then the pathos of propinquity 
blinded Augustus, as later Aurelius; he set Tiberius aside for his pretty 
grandsons; compelled him to renounce a fortunate marriage to become the 
cuckold of Julia; resented his resentment, and let him grow old with philos- 
ophy in Rhodes. When at last Tiberius reached the principate he was already 
fifty-five, a disillusioned misanthrope who found no happiness in power. 

To understand him we must remember that he was a Claudian; with him 
began the Claudian branch of that Julio-Claudian dynasty which ended 
with Nero. Through both parents he inherited the proudest blood in Italy, 
the narrowest prejudices, the strongest will. He was taU, powerful, and 
well featured; but acne accentuated his shyness, his awkward manners, his 
moody diffidence, and his love of seclusion.^ The fine head of Tiberius in 
the Boston Museum shows him as a young priest, with broad forehead, large 
deep eyes, and pensive countenance; he was so serious in youth that wags 
called him “the old man.” He received all the education that Rome, Greece, 
environment, and responsibility could afford; he learned the two classic 
languages and literatures well, wrote lyrics, dabbled in astrology, and 
“neglected the gods.” ® He loved his brother Drusus despite the young man’s 
superior popularity; he was a devoted husband to Vipsania, and so generous 
to his friends that they could safely give him presents in the expectation of a 
fourfold return. The severest as well as the ablest general of his time, he 
gained the admiration and affection of his soldiers because he watched over 

* All further dates will be a.d. unless otherwise noted. 

259 



CAESAR AND CHRIST 


260 


(chap. XIII 


every detail of their welfare, and won his battles by strategy rather than by 
blood. 

His virtues ruined him. He believed the stories told about the 7nos maiormn, 
and wished to see the stem quahties of old Rome reborn in the new Babylon; 
he approved the moral reforms of Augustus and made clear his intention to 
enforce them. He had no liking for the ethnic farrago that steamed in the 
caldron of Rome; he gave it bread but no circuses, and offended it by not 
attending the games presented by rich men. He was convinced that Rome 
could be saved from a vulgar degeneration only by an aristocracy stoic in 
conduct and refined in taste. But the aristocracy could no more than the 
people bear his “stiff neck” and sober countenance, his long silences and 
slow speech, his visible awareness of his own excellence, and, worst of all, 
his grim husbanding of the public funds. He had been misborn a stoic in an 
epicurean age, and he was too coldly honest to learn Seneca’s art of preach- 
ing the one doctrine in beautiful language and practicing the other with 
graceful constancy. 

Four weeks after the death of Augustus, Tiberius appeared before the 
Senate and asked it to restore the Republic. He was unfit, he told them, to 
rule so vast a state; “in a city so well provided with men of illustrious 
character ... the several departments of public business could be better 
filled by a coalition of the best and ablest citizens.” ^ Not daring to take him 
at his word, the Senate exchanged bows with him until at last he accepted 
power “as a wretched and burdensome slavery,” and in the hope that some- 
day the Senate would permit him to retire to privacy and freedom.® The 
play was well acted on both sides. Tiberius wanted the principate, or he 
would have found some way to evade it; the Senate feared and hated him, 
but shrank from re-establishing a republic based, like the old, upon theo- 
retically sovereign assemblies. It wanted less democracy, not more; and it 
was pleased when Tiberius (a.d. 14) persuaded it to take over from the 
coimticc centiiriata the power of choosing the public officials. The citizens 
complained for a time, mourning the loss of the sums they had received for 
their votes. The only political power now left to the common man was the 
right of electing the emperor by assassination. After Tiberius democracy 
passed from the assemblies to the army, and voted with the sword. 

He seems to have sincerely disliked monarchy and to have considered 
himself the administrative head and arm of the Senate. He refused all titles 
that savored of royalty, contented himself with that of princeps senatiis, 
stopped all efforts to deify him or offer worship to his genius, and made 
evident his distaste for flattery. When the Senate wished to name a month 
after him, as it had done for Caesar and Augustus, he turned the compliment 
aside with dry humor: “WTiat will you do if there should be thirteen 



CHAP.xm) the other side of monarchy 261 

Caesars?” ® * He rejected a proposal that he should revise the Senatorial list. 
Nothing could surpass his courtesy to this ancient “assembly of kings”; he 
attended its meetings, referred “even the smallest matters” to its judgment, 
sat and spoke as merely a member, was often in the minority, and made no 
protest when decrees were passed contrary to his expressed opinion.^ “He 
was self-contained and patient,” according to Suetonius, “in the face of 
abuse, slander, and lampoons against himself and his family; in a free country, 
he said, there should be freedom of speech and thought.” * His nominations, 
the hostile Tacitus admits, 

were made with judgment. The consuls and the praetors enjoyed 
the ancient honors of their rank. The subordinate officials exercised 
their functions free from imperial control. The laws, if we except 
those of violated majesty, flowed in their regular channel. . . . The 
revenues were administered by men of distinguished probity. . , . 

In the provinces no new burdens were imposed, and the old duties 
were collected without cruelty or extortion. . . . Good order pre- 
vailed among his slaves. ... In all questions of right between the 
emperor and individuals the courts of justice were open, and the law 
decided.® 

This Tiberian honeymoon lasted nine years, during which Rome, Italy, 
and the provinces enjoyed government as good as any in their history. 
Without additional taxes, despite many benefactions to stricken families and 
cities, the careful repair of all public property, the absence of booty-yielding 
wars, and the rejection of bequests made to the Prince by persons with 
children or near relatives, Tiberius, who had found 1 00,000,000 sesterces in 
the Treasury on his accession, left 2,700,000,000 there at his death. He tried 
to check extravagance by example rather than by law. He labored carefully 
on every aspect of domestic and foreign affairs. To provincial governors 
anxious to collect more revenues he wrote that “it was the part of a good 
shepherd to shear his flock, not fleece it.” Though skilled in the art of war, 
he denied himself, as Prince, the glories of the battlefield; and after the third 
year of his long reign he kept the Empire at peace. 

It was this pacific policy that marred the progress of his rule. His hand- 
some and popular nephew, Germanicus, whom he had adopted as his son at 
Drusus’ death, had won some victories in Germany and wished to go on to 
its conquest. Tiberius advised against it, to the disgust of the imperialistic 
populace. Because Germanicus was a grandson of Mark Antony, those who 
still dreamed of restoring the Republic used him as a symbol for their cause. 

* The Senate should have taken him at his word and divided the year into thirteen months 
of twenty-eight days each, with an intercalary holiday (in leap years two) at the end. 



262 ' CAESAR AND CHRIST (CHAP. XIII 

When Tiberius transferred him to the East, half of Rome called the young 
commander a martyr to the Prince’s jealousy; and when Germanicus sud- 
denly took sick and died (19), nearly all Rome suspected that Tiberius had 
had him poisoned. Cnaeus Piso, an appointee of Tiberius in Asia Minor, was 
accused of the crime and was tried by the Senate; foreseeing condemnation, 
he killed himself to save his property for his family. No facts appeared to 
indicate Tiberius’ innocence or guilt; we know only that he asked the 
Senate to give Piso a fair trial, and that Germanicus’ mother, Antonia, re- 
mained to the end of her hfe the most faithful friend of Tiberius.^^ 

The excited participation of the public in the celebrated case, the scur- 
rilous tales circulated about the Emperor, and the agitation now aroused 
against him by Germanicus’ widow, Agrippina, induced Tiberius to avail 
himself of that lex lulia de maiestate, or law of treason, which Caesar had 
passed to define crimes against the state. Since Rome had no pubhc prose- 
cutor or attorney general, and (before Augustus) no police, every citizen 
was empowered and requested to accuse before the courts any person whom 
he knew to have violated a law. If the accused was condemned, the delator 
or informer was awarded a fourth of the convicted man’s goods, while the 
state confiscated the rest. Augustus had used this dangerous procedure to 
enforce his marriage laws. Now, as plots multiplied against Tiberius, dela- 
tor es sprang up to profit from denouncing them; and the supporters of the 
Prince in the Senate were ready to prosecute such accusations vigorously. 
The Emperor sought to restrain them. He interpreted the law strictly in the 
case of persons charged with defaming the memory or statues of Augustus; 
but “personalities leveled against himself,” says Tacitus, “were to be let pass 
unpunished.” He assured the Senate that his mother Livia wished a similar 
leniency shown to assailants of her good name.^“ 

Livia herself was now a major problem of state. Tiberius’ failure to re- 
marry left him with no protection against a strong-minded woman accus- 
tomed to exercise authority over him. She felt that her maneuvers had 
cleared his way to the throne, and she gave him to understand that he held 
it only as her representative.^^ During the earher years of Tiberius’ reign, 
though he was approaching sixty, his official letters were signed by her as 
well as by himself. “But not satisfied to rule on equal terms with him,” says 
Dio, “she wished to assert a superiority over him . . . and undertook to 
manage ever)Thing like a sole ruler.” Tiberius long bore this situation 
patiently; but as Livia survived Augustus fifteen years, he at last built him- 
self a separate palace and left his mother in undisputed possession of that 
which Augustus had raised. Gossip accused him of cruelty to her, and of 
having starved his exiled wife. Meanwhile Agrippina was pushing her son 
Nero to succeed-if possible, to replace— Tiberius.^® This, too, he bore 



CHAP. XIIl) THE OTHER SIDE OF AIONARCHY 263 

with hot patience, merely chiding her with a Greek quotation: “Do you 
think a wrong is done you, dear daughter, if you are not empress? ” * Hardest 
of all for him to bear was the realization that his only son, Drusus, borne to 
him by his first wife, was a worthless rake, cruel, ill-mannered, and lecherous. 

The self-control with which Tiberius supported these tribulations left his 
nerves on edge. He retired more and more into himself, and developed a 
gloom of countenance and severity of speech that scattered all but his most 
hopeful friends. One man seemed unfailingly loyal to him— Lucius Aelius 
Sejanus. As prefect of the Praetorian Guard, Sejanus professed it his duty 
to protect the Prince; soon no one was admitted to the Emperor’s presence 
except through the hands and under the watch of the crafty vizier. Gradu- 
ally Tiberius entrusted to him more and more of the government. Sejanus 
persuaded him that the imperial safety required the closer presence of the 
Praetorian Guard. Augustus had stationed six of its nine cohorts outside the 
city limits; Tiberius now allowed all nine to pitch their camp at the Viminal 
Gate, only a few miles from the Palatine and the Capitol; there they became 
first the protectors, then the masters, of the emperors. So supported, Sejanus 
exercised his powers with increasing boldness and venality. He began by 
recommending men for office, he advanced his fortune by selling offices to 
the highest bidders, he ended by aspiring to the principate. A senate of real 
Romans would soon have overthrown him; but the Senate had, with many 
exceptions, become an epicure’s club too listless to wield competently even 
the authority that Tiberius had urged it to retain. Instead of unseating 
Sejanus, it crowded Rome with statues voted by it in his image and honor, 
and at his suggestion it banished one after another of Agrippina’s followers. 
When Tiberius’ son Drusus died, Rome whispered that Sejanus had poi- 
soned him. 

Overcome with disappointment and bitterness, Tiberius, now a lonely and 
melancholy man of sixty-seven, left the hectic capital and removed to the 
inaccessible privacy of Capri. But gossip followed him without impediment. 
People said that he wished to conceal his emaciated figure and scrofulous 
face, and to indulge himself in drink and unnatural vice.^® Tiberius drank 
considerably, but was no drunkard; the story of his vices was probably 
calumny;^^ most of his companions on Capri, says Tacitus, “were Greeks 
distinguished in nothing but literature.” He continued to administer care- 
fully the affairs of the Empire, except that he communicated his views and 
desires to officials and the Senate through Sejanus. Since the Senate increas- 
ingly feared him, or Sejanus, or the hovering Guard, it accepted the wishes 

* Agrippina, daughter of Julia by Agrippa, was Tiberius’ stepdaughter through his marriage 
with Julia, and his daughter-in-law through his adoption of Geimanicus. Her son Nero was the 
uncle, her daughter Agrippina the Younger the mother, of the Emperor Nero. 


CAESAR AND CHRIST 


264 


(chap. XIII 


of the Emperor as commands; and without any change in the constitution, 
and with no clear insincerity on Tiberius’ part, the principate became a 
monarchy under the man who had proposed to restore the Republic. 

Sejanus took advantage of his position to exile more of his enemies by 
having them accused under the “law of majesty,” and the weary Emperor no 
longer interfered. If we may believe Suetonius, Tiberius was now often 
guilty of cruelty;^® and we have the word of the unreliable Tacitus that he 
asked and obtained the death penalty for Poppaeus Sabinus on the ground 
that spies had overheard him plot against the government.*® A year later 
(27) Livia died, sad and lonely in the home of her former husband; Tiberius, 
who had seen her but once since leaving Rome, did not attend her funeral. 
Freed from the restraint that the “Mother of her Country” might have 
exercised, Sejanus now persuaded Tiberius that Agrippina and her son Nero 
had been involved in the conspiracy of Sabinus. The mother was banished 
to Pandateria, and the son to the island of Pontia, where shortly afterward 
he killed himself. 

Having won everything else, Sejanus now reached for the throne. Irked 
by a letter which Tiberius had written to the Senate recommending Gains, 
son of Agrippina, as successor to the principate, Sejanus formed a plot to 
kill the Emperor (31). Tiberius was saved by Germanicus’ mother, Antonia, 
who risked her life to send him a warning. The old Prince, not yet destitute 
of resolution, secretly placed a new prefect over the Praetorians, had Se- 
janus arrested, and accused him to the Senate. Never had that body so gladly 
complied with the imperial wishes. It condemned Sejanus with expedition 
and had him strangled that very night. A reign of terror followed, led partly 
by senators whose interests, relatives, or friends had been injured by Sejanus, 
and partly by Tiberius, whom fear and anger, topping an accumulation of 
disillusionments, had plunged into a fury of revenge. Every important agent 
or supporter of Sejanus was put to death; even his young daughter was con- 
demned; and since the law forbade the execution of a virgin, she was first 
deflowered and then strangled. Apicata, his divorced wife, committed sui- 
cide, but only after she had sent Tiberius a letter assuring him that Antonia’s 
daughter Livilla had joined with Sejanus in poisoning her husband Drusus, 
the Emperor’s son. Tiberius ordered Livilla tried, but she refused food until 
she died. Two years later (33) Agrippina killed herself in exile; and another 
of her sons, having been imprisoned, starved himself to death. 

Tiberius lingered for six years after the fall of Sejanus. Probably his mind 
was now disordered; only on this supposition can we explain the incredible 
cruelties attributed to him. We are told that he now supported, instead of 
checked, accusations for maiestas; all in all sixty-three persons were indicted 
on this charge during his reign. He begged the Senate to provide protection 



CHAP.XIIl) THE OTHER SIDE OF MONARCHY 265 

for “an old and lonely man,” In 37 he left Capri after nine years of self- 
imprisonment, and visited some cities in Campania. While stopping at Lucul- 
lus’ villa in Misenum he fell in a fainting fit, and seemed dead. The courtiers 
at once flocked about Gaius, soon to be Emperor, and then were shocked to 
learn that Tiberius was recovering. A friend of all concerned ended the 
embarrassment by smothering Tiberius with a pillow (37) 

He was, said Mommsen, “the ablest ruler the Empire ever had.” Almost 
every misfortune had come to him during his life; and after his death he fell 
upon the pen of Tacitus. 


II. GAIUS 

The populace celebrated the old Emperor’s passing with cries of “Tibe- 
rius to the Tiber!” and hailed the Senate’s ratification of Gaius Caesar Ger- 
manicus as his successor. Bom to Agrippina as she was accompanying 
Germanicus on his northern campaigns, Gaius had been brought up among 
soldiers, had imitated their dress, and had been affectionately named Caligula, 
or Little Boot, from the half boot (caliga) worn in the army. He now an- 
nounced that he would follow the principles of Augustus in his poHcy and 
would co-operate respectfully with the Senate in everything. He distributed 
among the citizens the 90,000,000 sesterces that Livia and Tiberius had be- 
queathed them, and added a gift of 300 sesterces to each of the 200,000 re- 
cipients of state com. He restored to the ccmntia the power to choose the 
magistrates, promised low taxes and rich games, recalled the banished vic- 
tims of Tiberius, and brought his mother’s ashes piously to Rome. He seemed 
to be in all ways the opposite of his predecessor— prodigal, cheerful, humane. 
Within three months of his accession the people had sacrificed 160,000 
victims to the gods in gratitude for so charming and beneficent a prince.-® 

They had forgotten his lineage. His father’s mother was the daughter of 
Antony, his mother’s mother was the daughter of Augustus; in his blood the 
war between Antony and Octavian was renewed, and Antony won. Caligula 
was proud of his skill as a dueler, a gladiator, and a charioteer; but he was 
“troubled with the falling sickness,” and at times was “hardly able to walk 
or collect his thoughts.” He hid under the bed when it thundered, and fled 
in terror from the sight of Aetna’s flames. He found it hard to sleep and 
would wander through his enormous palace at night crying for the dawn. 
He was tall, huge, hairy, except for a bald crown; his hollow eyes and 
temples made him look forbidding, to his delight; he “practiced all lands of 
fearsome expressions before a mirror.” He had received a good schooling, 
was an eloquent orator, had a keen wit, and a sense of humor that knew no 
scruple and no law. Infatuated with the theater, he subsidized many per- 



266 CAESAR AND CHRIST (cHAP. XIII 

formers and himself privately acted and danced; desiring an audience, he 
summoned the leaders of the Senate as if to some vital conference, and then 
displayed his steps before them.^® A quiet life of responsible labor might 
have steadied him, but the poison of power made him mad. Sanity, like gov- 
ernment, needs checks and balances; no mortal can be omnipotent and sane. 
When Caligula’s grandmother Antonia gave him some advice he rebuked 
her with the remark, “Remember that I have the right to do anything to 
anybody.” In the midst of a banquet he reminded his guests that he could 
have them all killed where they reclined; and while embracing his wife or 
mistress he would say pleasantly, “Off comes this beautiful head whenever 
I give the word.” 

Soon therefore the young Prince who had been so respectful of the Senate 
began to give it orders and exact an Oriental subservience. He let senators 
kiss his feet in homage, and senators thanked him for the honor.^® He ad- 
mired Egypt and its ways, introduced many of these to Rome, and longed 
to be worshiped. Pharaoh-like, as a god. He made the religion of Isis one of 
the official cults of the Roman state. He did not forget that his great-grand- 
father had planned to unite the Mediterranean region under an Oriental 
monarchy; he too thought of making his capital at Alexandria, but distrusted 
the wit of its people. Suetonius describes him as living in “habitual incest 
with all his sisters”;^ it seemed to him an excellent Egyptian custom. Ill, he 
made his sister Drusilla heir to his throne; when she married he made her 
divorce her husband, and “treated her as his lawful wife.” To other desired 
women he sent letters of divorce in their husbands’ names, and invited them 
to his embraces; there was scarcely one woman of rank whom he did not 
approach. Amid these and some homosexual amours he found time for four 
marriages. Attending the wedding of Livia Orestilla and Gains Piso, he took 
the bride to his own house, married her, and in a few days divorced her. 
Hearing that Lolha Paulina was very beautiful, he sent for her, divorced her 
from her husband, married her, divorced her, and forbade her to have rela- 
tions with any man thereafter. His fourth wife, Caesonia, was pregnant by 
her husband when he married her. She was neither young nor fair, but he 
loved her faithfully. 

In this imperial frolic government was an aside, and could usually be left 
to inferior minds. Cahgula ably revised the roster of the business class and 
promoted its best members to the Senate. But his extravagance soon ex- 
hausted the full treasuries left him by Tiberius. He took his baths not in 
water but in perfumes; on one banquet he spent 10,000,000 sesterces.®^ He 
built great pleasure barges with colonnades, banquet halls, baths, gardens, 
fruit trees, and gem-set sterns. He had his engineers span Baiae’s bay with a 
bridge resting on so many boats that Rome suffered famine for lack of ships 



CHAP, xm) the other side of monarchy 267 

to import corn. When the bridge was completed a great celebration took 
place, illuminated by flood lights in the modern manner; the people drank 
merrily, boats overturned, and many were drowned. From the roof of the 
Basilica Julia he would scatter gold and silver coins among the people below 
and watch with glee their fatal scrambling. He was so devoted to the green 
faction at the races that he gave a charioteer 2,000,000 sesterces. He built a 
marble stall and an ivory manger for the race horse Incitatus, invited it to 
dinner, and proposed to make it consul. 

To raise funds for his lifelong Saturnalia, Caligula restored the custom of 
presenting gifts to the emperor; he accepted these in person, on his palace 
terrace, from all who came to give. He encouraged citizens to name him 
heir in their wills. He levied taxes upon everything: a sales tax on all food, 
a tax on all legal processes, a twelve and a half per cent tax on the wages of 
porters. “On the earnings of prostitutes,” Suetonius avers, he laid a tax of “as 
much as each received for one embrace; and the law provided that those 
who had ever been prostitutes should remain subject to this tax even after 
they married.” He had rich men accused of treason and condemned to 
death as an aid to the Treasury. He personally auctioned off gladiators and 
slaves, and forced aristocrats to attend and bid; when one of these slept, 
Caligula interpreted his nods as bids, so that the sleeper, waking, found him- 
self richer by thirteen gladiators and poorer by 9,000,000 sesterces.®® He 
compelled senators and knights to fight as gladiators in the arena. 

After three years a conspiracy was formed to end this humiliating buf- 
foonery. Caligula detected it and revenged himself by a reign of terror en- 
hanced by his maniac joy in inflicting pain. The executioners were instructed 
to kill his victims “by numerous slight wounds, so that they may feel that 
they are dying.” ®^ If we may believe Dio Cassius, he forced his saintly 
grandmother Antonia to kill herself.®® Suetonius recounts that when meat 
ran short for feeding the beasts kept for gladiatorial games, Caligula ordered 
“all bald-headed” prisoners to be fed to the animals for the public good; 
that he had men of high rank branded with irons, condemned to mines, 
thrown to beasts, or shut up in cages and then sawn in two.®® These are 
stories that we have no means of disproving and must record as the tradi- 
tion; but Suetonius loved gossip, the senator Tacitus hated the emperors, 
and Dio Cassius wrote two centuries after the event.®^ More credible is the 
report that Caligula began the war between the principate and philosophy 
by exiling Carrinas Secundus and sentencing two other teachers to death. 
The young Seneca was marked for execution, but was spared because he 
was sickly and might be relied upon to die without prodding. Claudius, uncle 
of Caligula, escaped because he was, or pretended to be, an insignificant 
book-ridden dolt. 



268 


CAESAR AND CHRIST 


(chap. XIII 

Caligula’s final pleasantry was to announce himself as a god, equal to 
Jupiter himself. Famous statues of Jove and other deities were decapitated 
and crowned with heads of the Emperor. He enjoyed sitting on a throne in 
the Temple of Castor and Pollux and receiving divine worship. At times he 
would converse with an image of Jupiter, often in terms of reproof; and he 
had a contrivance made by which he could reply to Jove’s thunder and 
hghtning peal for peal and stroke for stroke.®® He set up a temple to his god- 
head, with a corps of priests and a supply of select victims, and he appointed 
his favorite horse as one of the priests. He pretended that the moon-goddess 
had come down to embrace him, and asked Vitellius could he not see her. 
“No,” answered that wise courtier, “only you gods can see one another.” 
The people were not deceived. When a Gallic cobbler saw Cahgula mas- 
querading as Jupiter, and was asked what he thought of the Emperor, he 
said, simply, “A big humbug.” Caligula heard, but did not punish such re- 
freshing courage.^^ 

At twenty-nine this god was an old man, worn out by excesses, probably 
venereally diseased, with a small and half -bald head upon a fat body, with a 
hvid complexion, hollow eyes, and a sinister glance. His fate came suddenly, 
and from that Praetorian Guard whose support he had long purchased with 
gifts. A tribune of the Guard, Cassius Chaerea, insulted by the obscenities 
that Caligula gave him as passwords day after day, killed him in the secret 
passage of a theater ( 41 ). When the news went out, the city hesitated to 
believe it; men feared that this was a trick of the imperial prankster to find 
out who would rejoice at his death. To clarify the issue the assassins killed 
Caligula’s final wife and dashed out his daughter’s brains against a wall. On 
that day, says Dio, Cahgula learned that he was not a god.^® 


HI. CLAUDIUS 

Caligula had left the Empire in a dangerous condition: the Treasury 
empty, the Senate decimated, the people alienated, Mauretania in rebellion, 
Judea in arms at his insistence on placing his cult statue in the Temple of 
Jerusalem. No one knew where to find a ruler fit to face these problems. The 
Praetorians, coming upon the apparently imbecile Claudius hiding in a cor- 
ner, proclaimed him imperator. The Senate, in terror of the army, and per- 
haps relieved by the prospect of dealing with a harmless pedant instead of a 
reckless lunatic, confirmed the choice of the Guard; and Tiberius Claudius 
Caesar Augustus Germanicus hesitantly mounted the throne. 

He was the son of Antonia and Drusus, the brother of Germanicus and 
Livilla, the grandson of Octavia and Antony, of Livia and Tiberius Claudius 



CHAP.XIIl) THE OTHER SIDE OF MONARCHY 269 

Nero. He had been bom at Lugdunum (Lyons) in the year 10 b . c . and was 
now fifty years old. He was tall and stout, with white hair and an amiable 
face; but infantile paralysis and other diseases had weakened his frame. His 
legs were precariously thin and gave him a shambling gait; his head wobbled 
as he walked. He loved good wines and rich food and suffered from gout. 
He stuttered a bit, and his laughter seemed too boisterous for an emperor. 
In anger, says the merciless gossiper, “he would foam at the mouth and 
trickle at the nose.” He had been brought up by women and freedmen, 
had developed a timidity and sensitivity hardly advantageous to a ruler, and 
had had few opportunities to practice government. His relatives had looked 
upon him as a feeble-minded invalid; his mother, who had inherited Octavia’s 
gentleness, called him “an unfinished monster,” and when she wished to 
stress a man’s dullness she would term him “a bigger fool than my Claudius.” 
Scorned by all, he hved in safe obscurity, absorbed in gambling, books, and 
drink. He became a philologist and antiquarian, learned in “ancient” art, 
religion, science, philosophy, and law. He wrote histories of Etmria, Car- 
thage, and Rome, treatises on dice and the alphabet, a Greek comedy, and an 
autobiography. Scientists and savants corresponded with him and dedicated 
their tomes to him; Phny the Elder cites him four times as an authority. As 
Emperor he told his people how to cure snakebite, and forestalled super- 
stitious fears by predicting a solar eclipse on his birthday and explaining its 
cause. He spoke Greek well, and wrote several of his works in that language. 
He had a good mind; perhaps he was sincere when he told the Senate that 
he had pretended stupidity in order to save his head. 

His first act as Emperor was to reward with a donative of 1 5,000 sesterces 
every soldier of that Guard which had raised him to the throne. Caligula 
had given such gifts, but not so clearly in payment for the Empire; now 
Claudius acknowledged the sovereignty of the army, while canceling again 
the power of the Assembly to choose the magistrates. Whth wiser generosity 
he ended accusations de imiestate, released persons imprisoned on such 
charges, recalled all exiles, restored confiscated property, returned to Greece 
the statues that Gaius had stolen, and abolished the taxes that Gains had 
introduced. But he put to death Caligula’s assassins, on the theory that it was 
unsafe to condone the murder of an emperor. He ended the practice of 
prostration, and announced simply that he was not to be worshiped as a god. 
Like Augustus he repaired the temples and with antiquarian fervor sought 
to reanimate the old religion. He applied himself personally and conscien- 
tiously to public affairs; he even “made the rounds of those who sold goods 
and let buildings, and corrected whatever he deemed to be abuses.” ** But 
in truth, though he emulated the moderation of Augustus, his actual policies 



CAESAR AND CHRIST 


270 


(chap, xiii 


went beyond that cautious conservatism to the bold and varied plans of 
Caesar: the reform of government and law, the construction of public works 
and services, the elevation of the provinces, the enfranchisement of Gaul, 
and the conquest and Romanization of Britain. 


He surprised everyone by showing will and character as well as learning and 
intellect. Like Caesar and Augustus, he was convinced that the local magistrates 
were too few and untrained, the Senate too proud and impatient to do the com- 
plex work of municipal and imperial administration. He bowed to the Senate, 
and left it many powers and more dignities; but the real labor of government 
was performed by himself, a cabinet of his appointees, and a civil service gradu- 
ally organized, as under Caesar, Augustus, and Tiberius, out of the freedmen of 
the Emperor’s household, and using “public” slaves for clerical and minor tasks. 
Four cabinet members headed this bureaucracy: a secretary of state {ab epis- 
tiilis— “for communications”), a treasurer (a rationibiis—'ior accounts”), an- 
other secretary (a libellis— for petitions), and an attorney general {a cognition- 
ibus— 'for actions at law”). Able freedmen— Narcissus, Pallas, and Callistus— 
held the first three posts. Their rise to power and wealth was the symbol of a 
wide elevation of the freedman class, which had been going on for centuries and 
reached a new height in Claudius’ reign. When the aristocracy protested against 
the empowerment of these parvenus, Claudius revived the office of censor, had 
himself chosen to it, revised the list of persons eligible to the Senate, eliminated 
the chief opponents of his policies, and added new members from the knights 
and the provinces. 

Equipped with these administrative organs, he set himself an ambitious pro- 
gram of construction and reform. He improved the procedure of the courts, de=- 
creed penalties for the law’s delays, sat patiently as judge many hours every 
week, and forbade the application of torture to any citizen. To prevent the 
floods that endangered Rome all the more frequently as the Apennines were 
being denuded of timber, he had an additional channel dug for the lower course 
of the Tiber. To expedite the import of grain he had a new harbor (Portus) 
built near Ostia, with commodious warehouses and docks, two great moles to 
break the fury of the sea, and a channel connecting the harbor with the Tiber 
above the river’s silted mouth. He finished the “Claudian” aqueduct begun by 
Caligula, and constructed another, the Anio Novus, both immense works and 
notable for the beauty of their lofty arches. Observing that the lands of the 
Marsians were periodically swamped by the overflow of Lake Fucinus, he pro- 
vided state funds for the labor of 30,000 men during eleven years, digging a three- 
mile tunnel from the lake through a mountain to the river Ciris. Before releasing 
the waters of the lake he staged on it a sham naval battle between two fleets 
manned by 19,000 condemned criminals, before spectators gathered from all 
Italy upon the slopes of the surrounding hills. The combatants saluted the Em- 
peror with a historic phrase; Ave Caesar! moritiiri salutanms tc— “Hail Caesar! 
we who are about to die salute you.” 



CHAP.XIIl) THE OTHER SIDE OF MONARCHY 271 

The provinces prospered under him as in Augustan days. He punished 
decisively the malfeasance of officials, except in the case of Felix, procurator 
of Judea, whose misrule was concealed from him by Pallas, brother of Saint 
Paul’s inquisitor. He busied himself with every phase of provincial affairs; 
his edicts and inscriptions, found throughout the Empire, are marked by his 
characteristic fussiness and prolixity, but they show a mind and will intel- 
ligently devoted to the public good. He labored to improve communication 
and transport, to protect travelers from brigandage, and to reduce the cost 
of the official post to the communities it served. Like Caesar he wished to 
raise the provinces to the level of Italy in a Roman commonwealth. He car- 
ried out Caesar’s design in granting full citizenship to Transalpine Gaul; if 
he had had his way he would have enfranchised all freemen in the Empire.^® 
A bronze tablet unearthed at Lyons in 1524 has preserved for us part of the 
rambling speech in which he persuaded the Senate to admit to its member- 
ship and to imperial office those Gauls who held the Roman franchise. 
Meanwhile he did not allow the army to deteriorate or the frontiers to be 
infringed; his legions were kept busy and fit, and great generals like Corbulo, 
Vespasian, and Paulinus developed under his choice and encouragement. 
Again deciding to complete Caesar’s plans, he invaded Britain in 43, con- 
quered it, and was back in Rome within six months of setting out. In the 
triumph accorded him he violated precedent by pardoning the captured 
British king, Caractacus. The people of Rome laughed at their strange Em- 
peror, but loved him; and when, on one of his absences from the capital, a 
false rumor spread that he had been killed, so great a turmoil of sorrow swept 
the city that the Senate had to issue official assurances that Claudius was safe 
and would soon be in Rome. 

From that great height he fell because he had built a government too 
complex for his personal supervision, and because his amiable spirit was too 
easily deceived by his freedmen and his family. The bureaucracy had im- 
proved administration and had made a thousand new openings for corrup- 
tion. Narcissus and Pallas were excellent executives, who considered their 
salaries unequal to their merits. To make up the difference they sold offices, 
extorted bribes by threats, and brought charges against men whose estates 
they wished to confiscate. They ended by being the richest individuals in all 
antiquity. Narcissus had 400,000,000 sesterces ($60,000,000); Pallas was 
miserable because he had only 300,000,000.^^ When Claudius complained 
of a deficit in the imperial Treasury, Roman wags remarked that he would 
have enough and to spare if he would take his two freedmen into partner- 
ship.^® The old aristocratic families, now comparatively poor, looked with 
horror upon these accumulations and powers, and burned with anger when 
they had to court ex-slaves to obtain a word with the Emperor. 



CAESAR AND CHRIST 


272 


(chap, xm 


Claudius was busy writing to appointees and scholars, preparing edicts and 
speeches, and attending to the needs of his wife. Such a man should have 
lived like a monk and barricaded himself against love; his wives proved a 
ruinous distraction, and his domestic policy was not as successful as his 
foreign. Like Caligula he married four times. His first wife died on her wed- 
ding day, the next two he divorced; then, aged forty-eight, he married 
Valeria Messalina, sixteen. She was not unusually pretty; her head was flat, 
her face florid, her chest malformed;'*® but a woman need not be beautiful 
to commit adultery. When Claudius became Emperor she assumed the rights 
and manners of a queen, rode in his triumph, and had her birthday celebrated 
throughout the Empire. She fell in love with the dancer Mnester; when he 
rejected her advances she begged her husband to bid him to be more obedient 
to her requests; Claudius complied, whereupon the dancer yielded to her 
patriotically. Messalina rejoiced at the simplicity of her formula, and adopted 
it with other men; those who still refused her were accused of invented 
crimes by officials phant to her influence, and found themselves deprived of 
their property and their liberty, sometimes of their lives.®® 

Perhaps the Emperor tolerated these irregularities to secure indulgence 
for his own. “He was immoderate in his passion for women,” says Suetonius, 
who adds, as a startling distinction, that Claudius “was wholly free from 
unnatural vice.” Messalina, says Dio, “gave him some attractive house- 
maids for bedfellows.” Needing funds for her escapades, the Empress sold 
offices, recommendations, and contracts. Juvenal has handed down the story 
that she would disguise herself, enter a brothel, receive all comers, and 
gladly pocket their fees; the tale was probably taken from tbe lost memoirs 
of Messalina’s successor and foe, the younger Agrippina. While Claudius, 
says Tacitus, “devoted all his time to the duties of his censorial office” ®®— 
including the supervision and improvement of Roman morals— Messalina 
“gave a loose to love,” and at last, while her husband was in Ostia, for mall y 
married a handsome youth, Caius Silius, “with pomp and all accustomed 
rites.” Narcissus informed the Emperor through the latter’s concubines 
and told him that an uprising was being planned to kill him and put Silius 
on the throne. Claudius rushed back to Rome, summoned the Praetorian 
Guard, had Silius and other lovers of Messalina slain, and then retired in 
nervous exhaustion to his rooms. The Empress hid herself in those gardens 
of Lucullus which she had confiscated for her pleasure. Claudius sent her a 
message inviting her to come and plead her cause. Fearing that the Emperor 
would forgive her and turn against him. Narcissus dispatched some soldiers 
with instructions to kill her. They found her alone with her mother, slew 
her with one blow, and left her corpse in her mother’s arms (48). Claudius 



CHAP. XIIl) THE OTHER SIDE OF MONARCHY 273 

told the Praetorian Guard that if he should every marry again they would 
be justified in killing him. He never mentioned Messalina again.* 

Within a year he was hesitating whether to marry Lolha Paulina or the 
younger Agrippina. Lollia, ex-wife of Caligula, was rich; sometimes, we are 
told, she wore jewelry worth 40,000,000 sesterces;®® perhaps Claudius ad- 
mired her money more than her taste. Agrippina was the daughter of the 
elder Agrippina and Germanicus; she too, had in her the unreconciled blood 
of Octavian and Antony, and had succeeded to the beauty, ability, resolu- 
tion, and unscrupulous vindictiveness of her mother. She was already twice 
a widow. By her first husband, Cnaeus Domitius Ahenobarbus, she had a 
son Nero, whose enthronement became the ruhng passion of her life; and 
from her second husband Caius Crispus, whom rumor accused her of 
poisoning, she inherited the wealth that sinewed her aims. Her problem was 
to become the wife of Claudius, to get rid of his son Britannicus, and make 
Nero, by adoption, heir to the Empire. The fact that she was Claudius’ 
niece did not deter her, but gave her opportunities for fond intimacies that 
stirred the aging ruler in no avuncular way. Suddenly he appeared before 
the Senate and asked it to bid him marry again for the good of the state. 
The Senate comphed, the Praetorians laughed, and Agrippina reached the 
throne (48). 

She was thirty-two, Claudius fifty-seven. His energies were failing; hers 
were at their height. Playing upon him with all her charms, she persuaded 
him to adopt Nero as his son, and to give his thirteen-year-old daughter 
Octavia to the sixteen-year-old youth in marriage (53). She assumed more 
and more pohtical power with each year, and finally sat beside him on the 
imperial dais. She recalled the philosopher Seneca from the exile to which 
Claudius had condemned him, and made him the tutor of her son (49) ; and 
she had her friend Burrus appointed prefect of the Praetorian Guard. So 
poised, she ruled with a virile hand and established order and economy in 
the imperial household. Her ascendancy might have been a boon to Rome 
had she not indulged her avarice and her revenge. She had Lolha Paulina put 
to death because Claudius, in a careless moment which no wife forgives, 
remarked on the elegance of Lollia’s figure. She had Marcus Silanus poisoned 
because she feared that Claudius might name him his heir. She conspired with 
Pallas to overthrow Narcissus, and this moneyed potentate, as faithful as he 
was corrupt, ended his career in a dungeon. The Emperor, weakened by ill- 
health, many labors, and sexual enterprise, allowed Pallas and Agrippina to 
establish another reign of terror. Men were accused, exiled, or killed because 

* Ferrero 56 and Bury 5~ have tried to explain away Messalina’s bigamy, but Tacitus vouches 
for the story as “well attested by writers of the period, and by grave and elderly men who lived 
at the time, and were informed of every circumstance.” 5® 



CAESAR AND CHRIST 


274 


(chap, xiii 


the Treasury was exhausted by public works and games and needed replen- 
ishment by confiscated wealth. Thirty-five senators and 300 knights were 
condemned to death in the thirteen years of Claudius’ reign. Some of these 
executions may have been justified by actual conspiracy or crime; we do not 
know. Nero later claimed that he had examined all the papers of Claudius, 
and that from these it appeared that not one prosecution had been set on foot 
by the Emperor’s order.®'* 

After five years of his fifth marriage Claudius awakened to what Agrip- 
pina was doing. He resolved to put an end to her power, and circumvent her 
plans for Nero, by naming Britannicus his heir. But Agrippina had more 
determination and less scruple. Perceiving the Emperor’s intentions she 
risked everything; she fed Claudius poisonous mushrooms, and he died after 
twelve hours of agony, without being able to utter a word (54). When the 
Senate deified him, Nero, already enthroned, remarked that mushrooms 
must be the food of the gods, since by eating them Claudius had become 
divine.®^ 


TV. NERO 

On his father’s side Nero belonged to the Domitii Ahenobarbi— so named 
from the bronzelike beards that ran in the family. For five hundred years 
they had been famous in Rome for ability, recklessness, haughtiness, courage, 
and cruelty. Nero’s paternal grandfather had a passion for games and the 
stage; drove a chariot in the races, spent money with open hand on wild 
beasts and gladiatorial shows, and had to be reproved by Augustus for bar- 
barous treatment of his employees and slaves. He married Antonia, daughter 
of Antony and Octavia. Their son Cnaeus Domitius enhanced the reputation 
of the family by adultery, incest, brutality, and treason. In a.d. 28 he married 
the second Agrippina, then thirteen years old. Knowing his wife’s ancestry 
and his own, he concluded that “no good man can possibly be bom from 
us.” They named their only child Lucius, and added the cognomen Nero, 
meaning, in the Sabine tongue, vahant and strong. 

The chief authors of his education were Chaeremon the Stoic, who taught 
him Greek, and Seneca, who taught him literature and morals but not philos- 
ophy. Agrippina forbade the last on the ground that it would unfit Nero for 
government;®® the result was creditable to philosophy. Like many a teacher, 
Seneca complained that his labors were tWarted by the mother: the boy 
would run to her when reproved, and was sure to be comforted. Seneca 
sought to train him in modesty and courtesy, simplicity and stoicism. If he 
could not retail to him the doctrines and disputes of the philosophers, he 
could at least dedicate to him the eloquent philosophical treatises that he was 



CHAP.XIU) the other SIDE OF MONARCHY 275 

composing, and hope that someday his pupil might read them. The young 
prince was a good student, wrote forgivable poetry, and addressed the Sen- 
ate in the graceful manner of his master. When Qaudius died, Agrippina 
had no great difficulty in securing the confirmation of her son on the throne, 
especially since her friend Burrus brought to him the full support of the 
Guard. 

Nero rewarded the soldiers with a donative, and gave 400 sesterces to 
every citizen. He pronounced over his predecessor a eulogy composed by 
the same Seneca who would soon publish, anonymously, a pitiless satire 
{Apocolocyntosh or Pumpkiinfication) on the late Emperor’s ejection from 
Olympus. Nero made the usual obeisance to the Senate, modestly excused his 
youth, and announced that of the powers heretofore taken by the prince 
he would keep only the command of the armies— a highly practical choice 
for the pupil of a philosopher. The promise was probably sincere, since Nero 
kept it faithfully for five years that quinquennium Neronis which Trajan 
later accounted the best period in the history of the imperial government.®® 
When the Senate proposed that statues of gold and silver should be raised in 
his honor, the seventeen-year-old Emperor rejected the offer; when two 
men were indicted for favoring Britannicus, he had the accusations with- 
drawn; and in a speech to the Senate he pledged himself to observe through- 
out his reign that virtue of mercy which Seneca was then extolling in an 
essay De clernemia. Asked to sign a death warrant for a condemned criminal, 
he sighed, “Would that I had never learned to write!” He abolished or re- 
duced oppressive taxes, and gave annuities to distinguished but impoverished 
senators. Recognizing his immaturity, he allowed Agrippina to administer 
his affairs; she received embassies, and had her image engraved beside his own 
on the imperial coins. Alarmed by this matriarchate, Seneca and Burrus 
conspired, by playing upon Nero’s pride, to win from her the administration 
of his powers. The infuriated mother announced that Britannicus was the 
true heir to the throne, and threatened to unmake her son as decisively as she 
had made him. Nero countered by having Britannicus poisoned. Agrippina 
retired to her villas and wrote her Memoirs as a last vindictive stroke— black- 
ening all the enemies of herself and her mother, and providing Tacitus and 
Suetonius with that museum of horrors from which they drew the darker 
colors for their portraits of Tiberius, Claudius, and Nero. 

Under the guidance of the philosopher-premier, and on the impetus of the 
administrative organization already devised, the Empire prospered within 
and without. The frontiers were well guarded, the Black Sea was cleared of 
pirates, Corbulo brought Armenia back under Rome’s protectorate, and 
Parthia signed a peace that endured for fifty years. Corruption was reduced 
in the courts and the provinces, bureaucratic personnel was improved, the 



CAESAR AND CHRIST 


276 


(chap. XIII 


Treasury was managed with economy and wisdom. Probably at Seneca’s 
suggestion Nero made the far-reaching proposal to abolish all indirect taxes, 
especially the customs duties collected at frontiers and ports, and so estab- 
lish free trade throughout the Empire. The measure was defeated in the 
Senate through the influence of the tax-gathering corporations— a defeat 
which indicates that the Principate was stiU recognizing its constitutional 
limits. 

To divert Nero from interference with state affairs, Seneca and Burrus 
allowed him to indulge his sensuality unrestrained. “At a time when vice 
had charms for all orders of men,” says Tacitus,®^ “it was not expected that 
the sovereign should lead a life of austerity and self-denial.” Nor could 
religious belief encourage Nero to morality; a smattering of philosophy had 
hberated his intellect without maturing his judgment. “He despised all 
cults,” says Suetonius, “and voided his bladder upon an image of the god- 
dess whom he most respected, Cybele.” His instincts inclined him to 
excessive eating, exotic desires, extravagant banquets where the flowers alone 
cost 4,000,000 sesterces;®® only misers, he said, counted what they spent. 
He admired and envied Caius Petronius, for that rich aristocrat taught him 
new ways of combining vice with taste. Petronius, says Tacitus in a classic 
description of the epicurean’s ideal, 

passed his days in sleep, and his nights in business, joy, and revelry. 
Indolence was at once his passion and his road to fame. What others 
did by vigor and industry, he accomplished by his love of pleasure and 
luxurious ease. Unlike the men who profess to> understand social en- 
joyment, and ruin their fortunes, he led a life of expense without pro- 
fusion; an epicure, yet not a prodigal; addicted to his appetites, but 
with refinement and judgment; an educated and elegant voluptuary. 

Gay and airy in his conversation, he charmed by a certain graceful 
negligence, the more engaging as it flowed from the natural frankness 
of his disposition. With all his delicacy and careless ease, he showed, 
when he was governor of Bithynia, and again when consul, that 
vigor of mind and softness of manners may unite in the same per- 
son. . . . From his public offices he returned to his usual gratifica- 
tions, fond of vice, or of pleasures that bordered on it. . . . 
Cherished by Nero and his companions . . . he was allowed to be the 
arbiter of taste and elegance. Without his sanction nothing was ex- 
quisite, nothing delightful or rare.^* 

Nero was not subtle enough to achieve this artistic epicureanism. He dis- 
guised himself and visited brothels; he roamed the streets and frequented 
taverns at night with the comrades of his mood, robbing shops, insulting 
women, “practicing lewdness on boys, stripping those whom they encoun- 



CHAP.XIIl) THE OTHER SIDE OF MONARCHY 277 

tered, striking, wounding, murdering.” A senator who defended him- 
self vigorously against the disguised Emperor was soon afterward forced 
to kill himself. Seneca sought to divert the royal lust by condoning Nero’s 
relations with an ex-slave, Claudia Acte. But Acte was too faithful to him 
to keep his affections; he soon exchanged her for a woman of superlative 
refinement in all the ways of love. Poppaea Sabina was of high family and 
great wealth; “she had everything,” says Tacitus, “except an honest mind”; 
she was one of those women who sp^nd all the day in adorning their persons, 
and exist only when they are desired. Her husband, Salvius Otho, boasted of 
her beauty to Nero; the Emperor at once commissioned him to govern 
Lusitania (Portugal), and laid siege to Poppaea. She refused to be his mis- 
tress, but agreed to be his wife if he would divorce Octavia. 

Octavia had borne the transgressions of Nero silently, and had preserved 
her own modesty and chastity amid the stream of sexual license in which she 
had been forced to live from her birth. It is to the honor of Agrippina that 
she lost her life in defending Octavia against Poppaea. She used every plea 
against the proposed divorce, even, says Tacitus, to offering her own charms 
to her son. Poppaea fought back with hers and won; youth was served. She 
taunted Nero with being afraid of his mother, and led him to believe that 
Agrippina was plotting his fall. Finally, in the madness of his infatuation, he 
consented to kill the woman who had borne him and given him half the 
world. He thought of poisoning her, but she had guarded against this by the 
habitual use of antidotes. He tried to have her drowned, but she swam to 
safety from the shipwreck he had arranged. His men pursued her to her 
villa; when they seized her she bared her body and said, “Plunge your sword 
into my womb.” It took many blows to kill her. The Emperor, viewing the 
uncovered corpse, remarked, “I did not know I had so beautiful a mother.” 
Seneca, it is said, had no share in the plot; but the saddest lines in the history 
of philosophy tell how he penned the letter in which Nero explained to the 
Senate how Agrippina had plotted against the Prince and, being detected, had 
killed herself.'^^ The Senate gracefully accepted the explanation, came in a 
body to greet Nero returning to Rome, and offered thanks to the gods for 
having kept him safe. 

It is hard to believe that this matricide was a youth of twenty-two with 
a passion for poetry, music, art, drama, and athletic games. He admired the 
Greeks for their varied contests of physical and artistic ability, and sought to 
introduce like competitions to Rome. In 59 he instituted the ludi iuvaiales, or 
Youth Games; and a year later he inaugurated the Neronia on the model of 
the quadrennial festival at Olympia, with contests in horse racing, athletics, 
and “music”— which included oratory and poetry. He built an amphitheater, 
a gymnasium, and a magnificent public bath. He practiced gymnastics with 



CAESAR AND CHRIST 


278 


(chap. XIII 


skill, became an enthusiastic charioteer, and finally decided to compete in 
the games. To his philhellenic mind this seemed not only proper, but in the 
best tradition of Greek antiquity. Seneca thought it ridiculous, and tried to 
confine the imperial exhibitions to a private stadium. Nero overruled him 
and invited the pubhc to witness his performance. It came, and applauded 
lustily. 

But what this uninhibited satyr really wanted was to be a great artist. 
Having every power, he longed also for every accomplishment. It is to his 
credit that he applied himself with painstaking seriousness to engraving, 
painting, sculpture, music, and poetry To improve his singing “he used to 
lie upon his back with a leaden plate upon his chest, purge himself by a 
syringe or by vomiting, and deny himself fruits and all foods injurious to 
the voice”;^'’ on certain days, for the same purpose, he ate nothing but garlic 
and olive oil. One evening he summoned the foremost senators to his palace, 
showed them a new water organ, and lectured to them on its theory and 
construction.'^® He was so fascinated by the music which Terpnos drew from 
the harp that he spent entire nights with him in practicing on that instrument. 
He gathered artists and poets about him, competed with them in his palace, 
compared his paintings with theirs, listened to their poetry, and read his 
own. He was deceived by their praise, and when an astrologer predicted that 
he would lose his throne he replied cheerfully that he would then make a 
living by his art. He dreamed of performing publicly in one day on the water 
organ, the flute, and the pipes, and then appearing as actor and dancer in the 
part of Virgil’s Tumus. In 59 he gave a semipublic concert as a harpist 
(citharoedus) in his gardens on the Tiber. For five years more he controlled 
his longing for a larger audience; at last he dared it in Naples; there the 
Greek spirit ruled, and the people would forgive and understand him. The 
auditorium was so overcrowded for his exhibition that it crumbled to 
pieces shortly after the audience had left. Encouraged, the young Emperor 
appeared as singer and harpist in the great theater of Pompey at Rome (65) . 
In these recitals he sang poems apparently composed by himself;* some frag- 
ments have survived and show a moderate talent. Besides many lyrics, he 
wrote a long epic on Troy (with Paris as hero), and began a still longer one 
on Rome. To complete his versatility, he came upon the boards as an actor, 
playing the roles of Oedipus, Heracles, Alcmaeon, even the matricide 
Orestes. The populace was delighted to have an emperor entertain it and 
kneel on the stage, as custom required, to ask for its applause. It took up the 
songs that Nero sang and repeated them in the taverns and the streets. His 


* Suetonius claims to have seen the royal manuscripts, with text and corrections in Nero’s 
hand.'’"^ 



CHAP.XIIl) THE OTHER SIDE OF MONARCHY 279 

enthusiasm for music spread through all ranks. His popularity, instead of 
waning, grew. 

The Senate was more horrified by these displays than by all the gossip 
of sexual license and perversion that ran about the palace. Nero replied that 
the Greek custom of confining athletic and artistic competitions to the 
citizen class was better than the Roman custom of leaving these to the slaves; 
certainly the contests should not take the form of slowly executing criminals. 
The young murderer decreed that so long as he ruled, no combat in the 
arenas should be carried to the death.'^* To restore the Greek tradition and 
dignify his own performances, he persuaded or compelled certain senators 
to compete in public as actors, musicians, athletes, gladiators, and charioteers. 
Some patricians, fike Thrasea Paetus, showed their disapproval of his ways 
by absenting themselves from the Senate when Nero came to address it; 
some others, like Helvidius Priscus, denounced him violently in those aristo- 
cratic salons that had become the last refuge of free speech; and the Stoic 
philosophers in Rome spoke ever more openly against this impish epicurean 
on the throne. Plots were laid to depose him. His spies discovered them, and 
like his predecessors he countered with a reign of terror. The law of maiestas 
was revived (62), and accusations were brought against men whose opposi- 
tion or wealth made their deaths culturally or financially desirable. For 
Nero, like Caligula, had now exhausted the Treasury with bis extravagance, 
his gifts, and his games. He announced his intention to confiscate completely 
the estates of citizens whose wills left insufficient sums to the Emperor. He 
stripped many temples of their votive offerings, and melted down their 
images of silver or gold. When Seneca protested and privately criticized his 
conduct— worse, his poetry— Nero dismissed him from the court (62), and 
the old philosopher spent the remaining three years of his life in the seclu- 
sion of bis villas. Burrus had died some months before. 

Nero now surrounded himself with new aides, mostly of coarser strain. 
Tigellinus, urban prefect, became his chief adviser, and smoothed the 
Prince’s path to every indulgence. In 62 Nero divorced and dismissed 
Octavia on the ground of barrenness, and twelve days later married Poppaea. 
The people protested mutely by throwing down the statues that Nero had 
raised to Poppaea and crowning those of Octavia with flowers. The angry 
Poppaea convinced her lover that Octavia was planning to remarry, and 
that a revolution was being organized to replace him in power with Octavia’s 
new mate. If we may follow Tacitus, Nero invited Anicetus, who had killed 
Agrippina, to confess adultery with Octavia and implicate her in a plot to 
overthrow the Prince. Anicetus played his part as commanded, was banished 
to Sardinia, and lived out his life in ease and wealth. Octavia was exiled to 
Pandateria. There, a few days after her arrival, imperial agents came to 



28 o CAESAR AND CHRIST ( CHAP. XIII 

murder her. She was still but twenty-two, and could not believe that life 
must end so soon for one so guiltless. She pleaded with her slayers, saying 
that she was now only Nero’s sister and could do him no harm. They cut 
off her head and brought it to Poppaea for their reward. The Senate, in- 
formed that Octavia was dead, thanked the gods for having again preserved 
the Emperor.^® 

Nero himself was now a god. After the death of Agrippina a consul-elect 
had proposed a temple “to the deified Nero.” When, in 63, Poppaea bore 
him a daughter who died soon afterward, the child was voted a divinity. 
When Tiridates came to receive the crown of Armenia he knelt and wor- 
shipped the Emperor as Mithras. When Nero built his Golden House he 
prefaced it with a colossus 120 feet high, bearing the likeness of his head 
haloed with solar rays that identified him as Phoebus Apollo. Actually he 
was now, at twenty-five, a degenerate with swollen paunch, weak and 
slender limbs, fat face, blotched skin, curly yellow hair, and dull gray eyes. 

As a god and an artist he fretted over the flaws of the palaces he had in- 
herited, and planned to build his own. But the Palatine was crowded, and at 
its base were on one side the Circus Maximus, on another the Forum, and 
on the .others slums. He mourned that Rome had grown so haphazardly, 
instead of being scientifically designed like Alexandria or Antioch. He 
dreamed of rebuilding Rome, of being its second founder, and renaming it 
Neropoiis. 

On July 18, 64, a fire broke out in the Circus Mapmus, spread rapidly, 
burned for nine days, and razed two thirds of the city. Nero was at Antium 
when the conflagration started; he hurried to Rome and arrived in time to 
see the Palatine palaces consumed. The Domus Transitoria, which he had 
Just built to connect his palace with the gardens of Maecenas, was one of the 
first structures to fall. The Forum and the Capitol escaped, and the region 
east of the Tiber; throughout the remainder of the city countless homes, 
temples, precious manuscripts, and works of art were destroyed. Thousands 
of people lost their lives amid falling tenements in the crowded streets; 
hundreds of thousands wandered shelterless through the nights, crazed with 
horror, and listening to rumors that Nero had ordered the fire, was scatter- 
ing incendiaries to renew it, and was watching it from the tower of Maecenas 
while singing his fines on the sack of Troy and accompanying himself on 
the lyre.* He energetically guided attempts to control or localize the flames 
and to provide relief; he ordered all public buildings and the imperial 
gardens to be throivn open to the destitute; he raised a city of tents on the 


•Tacitus (xv, 38), Suetomus (“Nero,” 38), and Dio Cassius (lxii, 16) all agree in accusing 
Nero of starting and renewing the fire in order to rebuild Rome. There is no proof of his guilt 
or innocence. 



CHAP.Xm) THE OTHER SIDE OF MONARCHY 281 

Field of Mars, requisitioned food from the surrounding country, and 
arranged for the feeding of the people.*® He bore without remonstrance the 
accusatory lampoons and inscriptions of the infuriated populace. According 
to Tacitus (whose Senatorial prejudice must always be remembered), he 
cast about for some scapegoat, and found one in 

a race of men detested for their evil practices, and commonly called 
Chrestiani. The name was derived from Chrestus, who, in the reign of 
Tiberius, suffered under Pontius Pilate, Procurator of Judea. By 
that event the sect of which he was the founder received a blow which 
for a time checked the growth of a dangerous superstition; but it 
revived soon after, and spread with recruited vigor not only in Judea 
. . . but even in the city of Rome, the common sink into which 
everything infamous and abominable flows like a torrent from all 
quarters of the world. Nero proceeded with his usual artifice. He 
found a set of profligate and abandoned wretches who were induced 
to confess themselves guilty; and on the evidence of such men a num- 
ber of Christians were convicted, not indeed on clear evidence of 
having set the city on fire, but rather on account of their sullen hatred 
of the whole human race. They were put to death with exquisite 
cruelty, and to their sufferings Nero added mockery and derision. 

Some were covered with skins of wild beasts, and left to be devoured 
by dogs; others were nailed to crosses; numbers of them were burned 
alive; many, covered with inflammable matter, were set on fire to 
serve as torches during the night. ... At length the brutality of 
these measures filled every breast w'ith pity. Humanity relented in 
favor of the Christians.®^ 

When the debris had been cleared away Nero undertook with visible 
pleasure the restoration of the city along the lines of his dream. Contribu- 
tions for this purpose were solicited or elicited from every city in the Em- 
pire, and those whose homes had been destroyed were enabled to rebuild 
out of these funds. The new streets were made wide and straight, the new 
houses were required to have their facades and first stories of stone, and had 
to be sufficiently separated from other buildings to oppose a protective gap 
to the spread of fire. The springs that flowed beneath the city were channeled 
into a reserve water supply in case of future conflagrations. Out of the 
imperial Treasury Nero built porticoes along the main thoroughfares, pro- 
viding a shaded porch for thousands of homes. Antiquarians and old men 
missed the picturesque, time-hallowed sights of the old city; but soon all 
agreed that a healthier, safer, and fairer Rome had risen from the fire. 

Nero might have earned forgiveness for his crimes had he now molded 
his hfe as he had remade his capital. But Poppaea died in 65, in advanced 
pregnancy, allegedly from a kick in the stomach; rumor said this had been 



282 CAESAR AND CHRIST (CHAP. XIII 

Nero’s answer to her reproaches for having come home late from the races.*^ 
He grieved bitterly over her passing, for he had eagerly awaited an heir. He 
had her body embalmed with rare spices, gave her a pompous funeral, and 
delivered a eulogy over the corpse. Having found a youth, Sporus, who 
closely resembled Poppaea, he had him castrated, married him by a formal 
ceremony, and “used him in every way like a woman”; whereupon a wit ex- 
pressed the wish that Nero’s father had had such a wife.®® In the same year 
he began the building of his Golden House; and its extravagant decoration, 
cost, and extent— covering an area that once had sheltered many thousands 
of the poor— renewed the resentment of the aristocracy and the suspicions 
of the plebs. 

Suddenly Nero’s spies brought him word of a widespread conspiracy to 
put Calpurnius Piso on the throne (65). His agents seized some minor per- 
sonages in the plot, and by torture or threat drew from them confessions 
implicating, among others, Lucan the poet and Seneca. Bit by bit the whole 
plan was laid bare. Nero’s revenge was so savage that Rome credited the 
rumor that he had vowed to wipe out the whole Senatorial class. When 
Seneca received the command to kill himself he argued for a while and then 
complied; Lucan hkewise opened his veins and died reciting his poetry. 
Tigellinus, jealous of Petronius’ popularity with Nero, bribed one of the 
epicure’s slaves to testify against his master, and induced Nero to order 
Petronius’ death. Petronius died leisurely, opening his veins and then closing 
them, conversing in his usual light manner with his friends and reading 
poetry to them; after a walk and a nap he opened his veins again and passed 
away quietly.®^ Thrasea Paetus, the leading exponent of the Stoic philosophy 
in the Senate, was condemned not for taking part in the plot, but on the 
general ground of deficient enthusiasm for the Emperor, for not enjoying 
Nero’s singing, and for composing a laudatory life of Cato. His son-in-law 
Helvidius Priscus was merely banished, but two others were put to death 
for writing in their praise. Musonius Rufus, Stoic philosopher, and Cassius 
Longinus, a great jurist, were exiled; two brothers of Seneca— Annaeus 
Mela, father of Lucan, and Annaeus Novatus, the Galho who in Athens had 
freed Saint Paul— were ordered to commit suicide. 

Having cleared the lines in his rear, Nero left in 66 to compete in the 
Olympic games and make a concert tour of Greece. “The Greeks,” he re- 
marked, “are the only ones who have an ear for music.” At Olympia he 
drove a quudrigu in the races; he was thrown from the car and was nearly 
crushed to death; restored to his chariot he continued the contest for a 
while, but gave up before the end of the course. The judges, however, 
knew an emperor from an athlete and awarded him the crown of victory. 
Overcome with happiness when the crowd applauded him, he announced 



CHAP. XIIl) THE OTHER SIDE OF MONARCHY 283 

that thereafter not only Athens and Sparta but all Greece should be free— 
i.e., exempt from any tribute to Rome. The Greek cities accommodated 
him by running the Olympian, Pythian, Nemean, and Isthmian games in one 
year; he responded by taking part in all of them as singer, harpist, actor, 
or athlete. He obeyed the rules of the various competitions carefully, was 
all courtesy to his opponents, and gave them Roman citizenship as consola- 
tion for his invariable victories. Amid his tour he received news that Judea 
was in revolt and that all the West was hot with rebellion. He sighed and 
continued his itinerary. When he sang in a theater, says Suetonius, “no one 
was allowed to leave, even for the most urgent reasons. And so it was that 
some women gave birth there, while some feigned death to be carried out.” 
At Corinth he ordered work started on a canal to cut the Isthmus as Caesar 
had planned; the task was begun, but was laid aside during the turmoil of 
the following year. Alarmed by further reports of uprisings and plots, Nero 
returned to Italy (67), entered Rome in a formal triumph, and showed, as 
trophies, the 1 808 prizes he had won in Greece. 

Tragedy was rapidly catching up with his comedy. In March, 68, the 
GalUc governor of Lyons, Juhus Vindex, announced the independence of 
Gaul; and when Nero offered 2,500,000 sesterces for his head, Vindex 
retorted, “He who brings me Nero’s head may have mine in return.” Pre- 
paring to take the field against this virile antagonist, Nero’s first care was 
to choose wagons to carry along with him his musical instruments and 
theatrical effects.®® But in April word came that Galba, commander of the 
Roman army in Spain, had joined fortunes with Vindex and was marching 
toward Rome. Hearing that the Praetorian Guard was ready to abandon 
Nero for proper remuneration, the Senate proclaimed Galba emperor. Nero 
put some poison into a small box and, so armed, fled from his Golden House 
to the Servilian Gardens on the road to Ostia. He asked such officers of the 
Guard as were in the palace to accompany him; all refused, and one quoted 
to him a line of VirgU; “Is it, then, so hard to die?” He could not believe 
that the omnipotence which had ruined him had suddenly ceased. He sent 
appeals for help to various friends, but none rephed. He went down to the 
Tiber to drown himself, but his courage failed him. Phaon, one of his 
freedmen, offered to conceal him in his villa on the Via Salaria; Nero grasped 
at the proposal, and rode through the dark four miles out from the center 
of Rome. He spent that night in Phaon’s cellar, clad in a soiled tunic, sleep- 
less and hungry, and trembhng at every sound. Phaon’s courier brought 
word that the Senate had declared Nero a pubhc enemy, had ordered his 
arrest, and had decreed that he should be punished “after the ancient 
manner.” Nero asked what this was. “The condemned man,” he was told, 
“is stripped, is fastened to a post by a fork passing through his neck, and is 



CAESAR AND CHRIST 


284 


(chap. XIII 


then beaten to death.” Terrified, he tried to stab himself; but he made the 
mistake of testing the poniard’s point first and found it disconcertingly 
sharp. Qmlis artifex pereo! he mourned— “What an artist dies in me!” 

As a new day dawned he heard the clatter of horses: the Senate’s soldiers 
had tracked him down. Quoting a verse of poetry— “Hark! now strikes upon 
my ear the trampling of swift couriers”— he drove a dagger into his throat; 
his hand faltered, and his freedman Epaphroditus helped him to press the 
blade home. He had begged his companions to keep his corpse from being 
mutilated, and Galba’s agents granted the wish. His old nurses, and Acte 
his former mistress, buried him in the vaults of the Domitii (68). Many of 
the populace rejoiced at his death and ran about Rome with liberty caps on 
their heads. But many more mourned him, for he had been as generous to 
the poor as he had been recklessly cruel to the great. They lent eager hearing 
to the rumor that he was not really dead but was fighting his way back to 
Rome; and when they had reconciled themselves to his passing they came 
for many months to strew flowers before his tomb.®® 


V. THE THREE EMPERORS 

Servius Sulpicius Galba reached Rome in June of 68. He was of noble 
birth, for he traced his lineage on his father’s side to Jupiter, and on his 
mother’s to Pasiphae, wife of Minos and the bull. In this year of his exalta- 
tion he was already bald, and his hands and feet were so crooked with gout 
that he could not wear a shoe or hold a book.®® He had the usual vices, 
normal and abnormal, but it was not these that made his reign so brief. What 
shocked army and populace were his economy of the public funds and his 
strict administration of justice.®^ When he ruled that those who had received 
gifts or pensions from Nero must return nine tenths to the Treasury, a 
thousand new enemies arose, and Galba’s days ran out. 

A bankrupt senator, Marcus Otho, announced that he could pay his 
debts only by becoming emperor.®® The Guards declared for him, marched 
into the Forum, and met Galba riding in a fitter. Galba offered his neck 
unresisting to their swords; they cut off his head, his arms, his lips; one of 
them carried the head to Otho, but as he could not hold it well by the sparse 
and blood- wet hair, he thrust his thumb into the mouth. The Senate hastened 
to accept Otho, just as Roman armies in Germany and Egypt were hailing 
as emperors their respective generals— Aulus Vitellius and Titus Flavius 
Vespasianus. Vitellius invaded Italy with his hardy legions, and swept away 
the weak resistance of the northern garrisons and the Praetorian Guard. 



CHAP. XIIl) THE OTHER SIDE OF MONARCHY 285 

Otho killed himself after a reign of ninety-five days, and Vitellius mounted 
the throne. 

It does not speak well for the Roman military system that so senile a man 
as Galba should have commanded in Spain, or so slothful an epicurean as 
Vitellius in Germany. He was a gourmand who thought of the Principate 
chiefly as a feast, and made a banquet of every meal. He governed in the 
intervals; and as these grew shorter he left state affairs to his freedman 
Asiaticus, who in four months became one of the richest men in Rome. 
When Vitellius learned that Vespasian’s general Antonins was leading an 
army into Italy to dethrone him, he delegated his defense to subordinates and 
continued to feast. In October of 69 the troops of Antonins defeated the 
defenders of VitelHus at Cremona in one of the bloodiest battles of ancient 
times. They marched into Rome, where the remnants of ViteUius’ legions 
fought bravely for him while he took refuge in his palace. The populace, 
says Tacitus, “flocked in crowds to behold the conflict, as if a scene of car- 
nage were no more than a public spectacle exhibited for their amusement”; 
while the battle raged some of them plundered shops and homes, and prosti- 
tutes plied their trade.®^ The soldiers of Antonins triumphed, killed with- 
out quarter, and pillaged without stint; and the mob, as ready as history to 
applaud the victors, helped them to ferret out their enemies. Vitellius, 
dragged from his concealment, was led half naked through the city with a 
noose around his neck, was pelted with dung, was tortured without haste, 
and at last, in a moment of mercy, was slain (December, 69) . The corpse 
was drawn through the streets with a hook and flung mto the Tiber.®* 


VI. VESPASIAN 

What a relief to meet a man of sense, ability, and honor! Vespasian, busy 
directing the war against Judea, took his time in coming to occupy the 
dangerous eminence that his soldiers had won for him, and which the Senate 
hurriedly confirmed. When he arrived (October, 70), he set himself with 
inspiring energy to restore order to a society disturbed in every aspect 
of its Hfe. Perceiving that he would have to repeat the labors of Augustus, 
he modeled his behavior and pohcy upon those of that prince. He made 
his peace with the Senate and re-established constitutional government; 
he freed or recalled those who had been convicted of lese-inajeste under 
Nero, Galba, Otho, and Vitellius; he reorganized the army, limited the 
number and power of the Praetorian Guard, appointed competent generals 
to suppress revolts in the provinces, and was soon able to close the Temple 
of Janus as a sign and pledge of peace. 



286 


CAESAR AND CHRIST 


(chap, xm 

He was sixty, but in the unimpaired vigor of his powerful frame. He 
was built foursquare in body and character, with a broad, bald, and massive 
head, coarse but commanding features, and small sharp eyes that pierced 
every sham. He had none of the stigmata of genius; he was merely a man of 
firm will and practical intelligence. He had been born in a Sabine village 
near Reate, of purely plebeian stock. His accession was a fourfold revolu- 
tion: a commoner had reached the throne, a provincial army had overcome 
the Praetorians and crowned its candidate, the Flavians had succeeded the 
Julio-Claudians, and the simple habits and virtues of the Italian bourgeois 
replaced, at the court of the emperor, the epicurean wastefulness of the city- 
bred descendants of Augustus and Livia. Vespasian never forgot, or sought 
to conceal, his modest ancestry. When expectant genealogists traced his 
family back to a companion of Hercules he laughed them into silence. 
Periodically he returned to the home of his birth to enjoy its rustic ways and 
fare, and he would not allow anything there to be changed. He scorned 
luxury and laziness, ate the food of peasants, fasted one day in each month, 
and declared war upon extravagance. When a Roman whom he had 
nominated for office came to him smelling of perfume, he said, “I would 
rather you smelled of garlic,” and withdrew the nomination. He made him- 
self easily accessible, talked and lived on a footing of equality with the 
people, enjoyed jokes at his own expense, and allowed everyone great free- 
dom in criticizing his conduct and bis character. Having discovered a con- 
spiracy against him he forgave the plotters, saying that they were fools 
not to realize what a burden of cares a ruler wore. He lost his good temper 
in one case only. Helvidius Priscus, restored to the Senate from the exile 
into which Nero had sent him, demanded the restoration of the Republic, 
and reviled Vespasian without concealment or restraint. Vespasian asked 
him not to attend the Senate if he proposed to continue such abuse; Helvidius 
refused. Vespasian banished him and tarnished an excellent reign by ordering 
him put to death. He regretted the action later, and for the rest, says 
Suetonius, showed “the greatest patience under the frank language of his 
friends . . . and the impudence of philosophers.” ®® These latter were not 
so much Stoics as Cynics, philosophical anarchists who felt that all gov- 
ernment was an imposition and attacked every emperor. 

To get fresh blood into a Senate depleted by family limitation and civil 
war, Vespasian secured appointment as censor, brought to Rome a thousand 
distinguished families from Italy and the western provinces, enrolled them 
in the patrician or equestrian orders, and over many bitter protests filled 
out the Senate from their ranks. The new aristocracy, under the stimulus 
of his example, improved Roman morals and society. It was not spoiled yet 
by idle wealth, nor yet so removed from labor and the soil as to disdain the 



CHAP.XIIl) THE OTHER SIDE OF MONARCHY 287 

routine tasks of life and administration; and it had something of the 
Emperor’s order and decency of life. Out of it came those rulers who, after 
Domitian, gave Rome good government for a century. Conscious of the 
evils that had flowed from the use of freedmen as imperial executives, 
Vespasian replaced most of them with men from this provincial infiltration 
and from Rome’s expanding business class. With their help he accomplished 
in nine years a miracle of rehabilitation. 

He calculated that 40,000,000,000 sesterces were needed to transform 
bankruptcy into solvency.®® * To raise this sum he taxed almost everything, 
raised the provincial tribute, reimposed it upon Greece, recaptured and let 
public lands, sold royal palaces and estates, and insisted upon such economy 
that the citizens denounced him as a miserly peasant. A tax was placed 
even upon the use of the public urinals that adorned ancient hke modem 
Rome; his son Titus protested against such undignified revenue, but the 
old Emperor held some coins of it to the youth’s nose and said, “See, my 
child, if they smell.” Suetonious accuses him of adding to the imperial 
income by selling offices, and by promoting the most rapacious of his pro- 
vincial appointees so that they might be swollen with spoils when he sud- 
denly summoned them, examined their transactions, and confiscated their 
gains. The crafty financier, however, used none of the proceeds for him- 
self, but poured them all into the economic recovery, architectural adorn- 
ment, and cultural advancement of Rome. 

It remained for this blunt soldier to establish the first system of state 
education in classical antiquity. He ordered that certain qualified teachers 
of Latin and Greek literature and rhetoric should thereafter be paid out of 
public funds and should receive a pension after twenty years of service. 
Perhaps the old skeptic felt that teachers had some share in forming public 
opinion and would speak better of a government that paid their way. Prob- 
ably for like reasons he restored many of the ancient temples, even in rural 
districts. He rebuilt the Temple of Jupiter, Juno, and Minerva, which had 
been burned down by the Vitellians over his soldiers’ heads; raised a majestic 
shrine to Pax, the goddess of peace; and began the most renowned of Roman 
buildings, the Colosseum. The upper classes mourned as they saw their for- 
tunes taxed to provide public works for the state and wages for proletaires; 
and the workers were not particularly grateful. He roused the people to an 
energetic campaign for clearing away the debris left by the recent war, and 
he himself carried the first load. When an inventor showed him plans for 
a hoisting machine that would greatly reduce the need for human labor in 
these enterprises of removal and construction, he refused to use it, saying. 


• The figure given by Suetonius is often rejected as incredible; but probably it was reckoned 
in a depreciated currency. 



CAESAR AND CHRIST 


288 


(chap. XIII 


“I must feed my poor.” In this moratorium on invention Vespasian recog- 
nized the problem of technological unemployment, and decided against an 
industrial revolution. 

The provinces prospered as never before. Their wealth was now twice as 
great— at least in monetary terms— as under Augustus, and they bore the 
increased tribute without injury. Vespasian sent the able Agricola to govern 
Britain, and delegated to Titus the task of ending the revolt of the Jews. 
Titus captured Jerusalem and returned to Rome with all the honors that 
usually crown superior killing. A spectacular triumph led a long procession 
of captives and spoils through the streets, and a famous arch was raised to 
commemorate the victory. Vespasian was proud of his son’s success but 
disturbed by the fact that Titus had brought home a pretty Jewish princess, 
Berenice, as his mistress, and wished to marry her; again capta jerwn victo- 
rem cepit. The Emperor could not see why one should marry a mistress; he 
himself, after the death of his wife, lived with a freedwoman without 
troubhng to wed her; and when this Caenis died he distributed his love 
among several concubines.®® He was convinced that the succession to his 
power must be settled before his death, as the alternative to anarchy. The 
Senate agreed, but demanded that he should name and adopt “the best of 
the best”— presumably a senator; Vespasian answered that he reckoned that 
Titus was the best. To ease the situation the young conqueror dismissed 
Berenice, and sought consolation in promiscuity The Emperor there- 
upon associated Titus with himself on the throne and delegated to him an 
increasing share in the government. 

In 79 Vespasian again visited Reate. While in the Sabine country he 
drank copiously the purgative waters of Lake Cutilia and was seized with 
severe diarrhea. Though confined to his bed he continued to receive em- 
bassies and perform the other duties of his office. Feeling the hand of death 
upon him he nevertheless kept his bluff humor. V ae! puto dens fio, he re- 
marked— “Alas, I think I am becoming a god.” 1®^ Almost fainting, he 
struggled to his feet with the help of attendants, saying, “An emperor should 
die standing.” With these words he concluded a full fife of sixty-nine years 
and a beneficent reign of ten. 


VII. TITUS 

His older son, named like himself Titus Flavius Vespasianus, was the most 
fortunate of emperors. Titus died in the second year of his rule and the 
forty-second of his age, while still “the darling of mankind”; time did not 
suffice him for the corruptions of power or the disillusionment of desire. 





Fig. 11— Relief from the Arch of Titus 





CHAP.XIIl) THE OTHER SIDE OF MONARCHY 289 

As a youth he had distinguished himself in ruthless war and tarnished his 
name with loose living; now, instead of letting omnipotence intoxicate him, 
he reformed his morals and made his government a model of wisdom and 
honor. His greatest fault was uncontrollable generosity. He counted that 
day lost on which he had not made someone happy with a gift; he spent 
too much on shows and games; and he left the replenished Treasury almost 
as low as his father had found it. He completed the Colosseum and built 
another municipal bath. No one suffered capital punishment during his 
brief reign; on the contrary, he had informers flogged and banished. He 
swore that he would rather be lolled than kill. When two patricians were 
detected in a conspiracy to depose him he contented himself with sending 
them a warning; then he dispatched a courier to relieve the anxiety of a 
conspirator’s mother by telling her that her son was safe. 

His misfortunes were disasters over which he could have little control. 
A three-day fire in the year 79 destroyed many important buildings, in- 
cluding again the Temple of Jupiter, Juno, and Minerva; in the same year 
Vesuvius buried Pompeii and thousands of Italians; and a year later Rome 
was stricken with a plague more deadly than any her history had yet 
recorded. Titus d;d all he could to lessen the sufferings caused by these 
calamities; “he showed not merely the concern of an emperor, but a father’s 
surpassing love.” He died of a fever in 8 1, in the same farmhouse in which 
his father had recently passed away. All Rome mourned him except the 
brother who succeeded to his throne. 


VIII. DOMITIAN 

Of Domitian it is harder to paint an objective portrait than even of Nero. 
Our chief sources for his reign are Tacitus and the younger Phny; they 
prospered under him, but belonged to the senatorial party that engaged 
with him in a war almost of mutual extermination. To set against these 
hostile witnesses we have the poets Statius and Martial, who ate or sought 
Domitian’s bread and literally praised him to the skies. Perhaps all four 
were right, for the last of the Flavians, like many of the Julio-Claudians, 
began like Gabriel and ended like Lucifer. In this respect Domitian’s soul 
walked with his body: in youth he was modest, graceful, handsome, tall; 
in later years he had “a protruding belly, spindle legs, and a bald head”— 
though he had written a book Ok the Care of the Hair}^^ In adolescence 
he composed poetry; in obsolescence he distrusted his own prose and let 
others write Ids speeches and proclamations. He might have been happier 
had not Titus been his brother; but only the noblest spirits can bear with 



290 


CAESAR AND CHRIST 


(chap. XIII 

equanimity the success of their friends. Domitian’s jealousy soured into a 
taciturn gloom, then into secret machinations against his brother; Titus had 
to beg his father to forgive the younger son. When Vespasian died, Domitian 
claimed that he had been left partner in the imperial power but that the 
Emperor’s will had been tampered with. Titus replied by asking him to be 
his partner and successor; Domitian refused, and continued to plot. When 
Titus fell ill, says Dio Cassius, Domitian hastened his death by packing him 
about with snow.^^^ W e cannot assess the truth of these stories, nor of those 
tales of sexual hcense that have come down to us— that Domitian swam 
with prostitutes, made the daughter of Titus one of his concubines, and 
“was most profligate and lewd toward women and boys alike.” All 
Latin historiography is present politics, a partisan blow struck for con- 
temporary ends. 

When we come to the actual policies of Domitian we find him, in his 
first decade, surprisingly puritan and competent. As Vespasian had modeled 
himself on Augustus, so Domitian seemed to take over the policies and 
manners of Tiberius. Having made himself censor for life, he stopped the 
publication of scurrilous lampoons (though he winked at the epigrams of 
Martial), enforced the Julian laws against adultery, tried to end child prosti- 
tution and reduce unnatural vice, forbade the performance of pantomimes 
because of their indecency, ordered the execution of a Vestal Virgin con- 
victed of incest or adultery, and put an end to the practice of castration, 
which had spread with the rising price of eunuch slaves. He shrank from 
any form of bloodshed, even the ritual sacrifice of oxen. He was honorable, 
liberal, and free from avarice. He refused legacies from those who had 
children, canceled all tax arrears more than five years old, and discounte- 
nanced delation. He was a strict but impartial judge. He had freedmen 
secretaries, but kept them on their good behavior. 

His reign was one of the great ages of Roman building. The fires of 79 
and 82 having caused much destruction and destitution, Domitian organ- 
ized a program of public works to provide employment and distribute 
wealth.^®® He, too, hoped to reanimate the old faith by beautifying or 
multiplying its shrines. He raised the Temple of Jupiter, Juno, and Minerva 
once more, and spent $22,000,000 on its gold-plated doors and gilded roof; 
Rome admired the result and mourned the extravagance. When Domitian 
built for himself and his administrative staff an enormous palace, the Domus 
Flavia, the citizens reasonably complained of the cost; but they raised no 
voice against the expensive games with which he sought to moderate his 
Tiberian unpopularity. He dedicated a temple to his father and his brother; 
he restored the Baths and Pantheon of Agrippa, the Portico of Octavia, 



CHAP.XIIl) THE OTHER SIDE OF MONARCHY 291 

the temples of Isis and Serapis; he added to the Colosseum, finished the Baths 
of Titus, and began those that were completed by Trajan. 

At the same time he did his dour best to encourage arts and letters. 
Flavian portrait sculpture reached its zenith in his principate; his coins are 
of outstanding excellence. To stimulate poetry he established in 86 the 
Capitoline games, which included contests in literature and music; and for 
these he built a stadium and a music hall in the Field of Mars. He gave modest 
help to the modest talent of Statius and the immodest talent of Martial. He 
rebuilt the public libraries, which had been destroyed by fire, and had their 
contents renewed by sending scribes to copy the manuscripts in Alexandria 
—another proof that the great library there had lost only a small part of its 
treasures in the fire started by Caesar. 

He managed the Empire well. He had Tiberius’ grim resolution as an 
administrator, pounced upon peculation, and kept strict watch on all ap- 
pointees and developments. As Tiberius had restrained Germanicus, so 
Domitian withdrew Agricola from Britain after that enterprising general 
had led his armies, and pushed the frontier, to Scotland; apparently Agricola 
wished to go farther, and Domitian demurred. The recall was attributed 
to jealousy, and the Emperor paid a heavy price for it when the history of 
his reign was written by Agricola’s son-in-law. He was equally unfortunate 
in war. In 86 the Dacians crossed the Danube, invaded the Roman province 
of Moesia, and defeated Domitian’s generals. The Prince took command, 
planned his campaign well, and was about to enter Dacia when Antoninus 
Saturninus, Roman governor of Upper Germany, persuaded two legions 
at Mainz to proclaim him emperor. The revolt was suppressed by Domitian’s 
aides, but it disconcerted his strategy by allowing the enemy time to pre- 
pare. He crossed the Danube, met the Dacians, and apparently suffered a 
reverse. He made peace with Decebalus, the Dacian king, sent him an annual 
douceur, and returned to Rome to celebrate a double triumph over the 
Chatti and the Dacians. He contented himself thereafter with the building 
of a limes, or fortified road, between the Rhine and the Danube, and another 
between the northward turn of the Danube and the Black Sea. 

The revolt of Saturninus was the turning point in Domitian’s reign, the 
dividing fine between his better and worse selves. He had always been 
coldly severe; now he sKpped into cruelty. He was capable of good govern- 
ment, but only as an autocrat; the Senate rapidly lost power under him; 
and his tenacious authority as censor made that body at once subservient 
and vengeful. Vanity, which flourishes even in the humble, had no check 
in Domitian’s status: he filled the Capitol with statues of himself, announced 
the divinity of his father, brother, wife, and sisters as well as his own, 
organized a new order of priests, the Flmiales, to tend the worship of these 



CAESAR AND CHRIST 


292 


(chap, xni 


new deities, and required officials to speak of him, in their documents, as 
Donttmis et Deus N oster—'Our Lord and God.” He sat on a throne, en- 
couraged visitors to embrace his knees, and established in his ornate palace 
the etiquette of an Oriental court. The Principate had become, through 
the power of the army and the decay of the Senate, an unconstitutional 
monarchy. 

Against this new development rebellion rose not only in the aristocracy 
but among the philosophers and in the religions that were flowing into Rome 
from the East. The Jews and the Christians refused to adore the godhead 
of Domitian, the Cynics decried all government, and the Stoics, though they 
accepted kings, were pledged to oppose despots and honor tyrannicides. 
In 89 Domitian expelled the philosophers from Rome, in 95 he banished 
them from Italy. The earlier edict applied also to the astrologers, whose 
predictions of the Emperor’s death had brought new terrors to a mind empty 
of faith and open to superstition. In 93 Domitian executed some Christians 
for refusing to offer sacrifice before his image; according to tradition these 
included his nephew Flavius Clemens.^®'^ 

In the last years of his reign the Emperor’s fear of conspiracy became 
almost a madness. He lined with shining stone the walls of the porticoes 
under which he walked, so that he might see mirrored in them whatever 
went on behind him. He complained that the lot of rulers was miserable 
since no man believed them when they alleged conspiracy, unless the con- 
spiracy succeeded. Like Tiberius he listened more readily to informers as 
he grew older; and as the delatores multiplied, no citizen of any prominence 
could feel safe from spies, even in his home. After Saturninus’ revolt indict- 
ments and convictions rapidly increased; aristocrats were exiled or killed, 
suspected men were tortured, even by having “fire inserted into their private 
parts.” The terrified Senate, including the Tacitus who recounts these 
events most bitterly, was the agent of trial and condemnation; and at each 
execution it thanked the gods for the salvation of the Prince. 

Domitian made the mistake of frightening his own household. In 96 he 
ordered the death of his secretary Epaphroditus because, twenty-seven 
years before, he had helped Nero to commit suicide. The other freedmen 
of the imperial household felt themselves threatened. To protect themselves 
they resolved to kill Domitian, and the Emperor’s vidfe Domitia joined in 
the plot. On the night before his last he leaped from his bed in fright. When 
the appointed moment came, Domitia’s servant struck the first blow; four 
others took part in the assault; and Domitian, struggling madly, met death 
in the forty-fifth year of his age and the fifteenth of his reign (96). When 
the news reached the senators they tore down and shattered all images of 



CHAP.XIIl) the other SIDE OF MONARCHY 293 

him in their chamber, and ordered that all statues of him, and all inscrip- 
tions mentioning his name, should be destroyed throughout the realm. 

History has been unfair to this “age of despots” because it has spoken here 
chiefly through the most brilliant and most prejudiced of historians. It is 
true that the gossip of Suetonius often confirms— or follows— the invective 
of Tacitus; but the study of literature and inscriptions has condemned them 
both as mistaking the vices of ten emperors for the record of an empire 
and a century. There was something good in the worst of these rulers— 
devoted statesmanship in Tiberius, a charming gaiety in Caligula, a plodding 
wisdom in Claudius, an exuberant aestheticism in Nero, a stem competence 
in Domitian. Behind the adulteries and the murders an administrative organi- 
zation had formed which provided, through all this period, a high order of 
provincial government. The emperors themselves were the chief victims 
of their power. Some disease in the blood, fired by the heat of loosed desire, 
had pursued the Juho-Claudians as fatally as the children of Atreus; and 
some flaw in the system had debased the Flavians in one generation from 
patient statesmanship to terrified cruelty. Seven of these ten men met a 
violent end; nearly all of them were unhappy, surrounded by conspiracy, 
dishonesty, and intrigue, trying to govern a world from the anarchy of a 
home. They indulged their appetites because they knew how brief was 
their omnipotence; they lived in the daily horror of men condemned to an 
early and sudden death. They went under because they were above the 
law; they became less than men because power had made them gods. 

But we must not absolve the age or the principate of its ignominy and its 
crimes. It had given peace to the Empire, but terror to Rome; it had injured 
morals by the high example of cruelty and lust; it had torn Italy with a 
civil war more ferocious than that of Caesar and Pompey; it had filled the 
islands with exiles and had killed off the best and bravest men. It had suborned 
the treachery of relatives and friends by rewarding avaricious spies. It had, 
in Rome, replaced a government of laws with a tyranny of men. It had 
raised gigantic edifices by accumulating tribute, but it had dwarfed the soul 
by frightening talented or creative minds into servility or silence. Above 
all, it had made the army supreme. The power of the prince over the Senate 
lay not in his superior genius, nor in custom, nor in prestige; it rested upon 
the pikes of the Guard. When provincial armies saw how emperors were 
made, how rich were the donatives and spoils of the capital, they deposed 
the Praetorians and themselves entered upon the business of making kings. 
For a century yet the wisdom of great rulers chosen by adoption rather 
than by heredity, violence, or wealth would hold the legions in check and 



CAESAR AND CHRIST 


294 


(chap. XIII 


keep the frontiers safe. But when, through a philosopher’s love, idiocy would 
again reach the throne, the armies would run riot, chaos would break 
through the fragile film of order, and civil war would join hands with the 
waiting barbarians to topple down the noble and precarious structure of 
government that the genius of Augustus had built. 



CHAPTER XIV 


The Silver Age 

A.D. 14-96 


I. THE DILETTANTES 

T radition has given to Latin letters from a.d. 14 to 1 17 the name 
of Sliver Age, Implying a fall from the cultural excellence of the 
Augustan Age. Tradition Is the voice of time, and time Is the medium of 
selection; a cautious mind will respect their verdict, for only youth knows 
better than twenty centuries. We may be permitted, however, to suspend 
judgment, to give Lucan, Petronlus, Seneca, the elder Pliny, Celsus, Statius, 
Martial, Quintilian— and. In later chapters, Tacitus, Juvenal, Pliny the 
Younger, and Epictetus— an unbiased hearing, and enjoy them as If we had 
never heard that they belonged to a decadent period. In every epoch some- 
thing is decaying and something is growing. In epigram, satire, the novel, 
history, and philosophy the Silver Age marks the zenith of Roman litera- 
ture, as it represents in realistic sculpture and mass architecture the climax 
of Roman art. 

The speech of the common man re-entered literature, diminishing inflections, 
relaxing syntax, and dropping final consonants with Gallic impertinence. About 
the middle of the first century the Latin V (which had been pronounced like 
our W) and B (between vowels) were both softened into a sound like the Eng- 
lish V; so habere, to have, became in sound havere, and prepared for Italian avere 
and French avoir; while vinum, wine, began to approximate, by lazy slurring of 
the changing final consonant, the Italian vino and the French vin. The Latin 
language was preparing to mother Italian, Spanish, and French. 

It must be admitted that rhetoric had now grown at the expense of eloquence, 
grammar at the expense of poetry. Able men devoted themselves beyond prece- 
dent to studying the form, evolution, and niceties of the language, editing al- 
ready “classical” texts, formulating the august rules of literary composition, 
forensic oratory, poetic meter, and prose rhythm. Claudius tried to reform the 
alphabet; Nero made poetry fashionable by his almost Japanese example; and 
the elder Seneca xvrote manuals of rhetoric on the ground that eloquence gives 
to every power a double power. Without eloquence only generals could rise in 
Rome; and even generals had to be orators. The mania for rhetoric seized all 

295 



CAESAR AND CHRIST 


296 


(chap. XIV 


forms of literature: poetry became rhetorical, prose became poetical, and Pliny 
himself wrote an eloquent page in the six volumes of his Natural History. Men 
began to worry about the balance of their phrases and the melody of their clauses; 
historians wrote declamations, philosophers itched for epigrams, and every one 
wrote sententiae—conc&ntTzted pills of wisdom. All the polite world was writing 
poetry, and reading it to friends in hired halls or theaters, at table, even (Martial 
complained) in the bath. Poets engaged in public competitions, won prizes, were 
feted by municipalities and crowned by emperors; aristocrats and princes wel- 
comed dedications or tributes and paid for them with dinners or denarii. The 
passion for poetry gave a pleasant aspect of amateur authorship to an age and 
city darkened with sexual license and periodic terror. 

Terror and poetry met in the life of Lucan. The older Seneca was his grand- 
father, the philosopher Seneca his uncle. Born in Corduba in 39, and named 
Marcus Annaeus Lucanus, he was brought in infancy to Rome and grew up in 
aristocratic circles where poetry and philosophy rivaled amorous and political 
intrigues as the foci of life. At twenty-one he competed in the Neronian Games 
with a poem “In Praise of Nero,” and won a prize. Seneca introduced him at 
court, and soon the poet and the Emperor were bandying epics. Lucan made the 
mistake of winning first prize in a poetic contest with the Prince; Nero ordered 
him to publish no more, and Lucan withdrew to avenge himself in private with 
a vigorous but rhetorical epic, Pharsalia, which viewed the Civil War from the 
standpoint of the Pompeian aristocracy. Lucan is fair to Caesar, and writes of 
him an illuminating phrase: nil actum credens cum quid superesset agendum— 
“thinking nothing done while anything remained to do.” ^ But the real hero of 
the book is the younger Cato, whom Lucan equals with the gods in a famous 
line: victrix causa deis placuit, sed victa Catoni—‘tht winning cause pleased the 
gods, but the lost one pleased Cato.” - Lucan too loved a lost cause and died for 
it. He joined in the conspiracy to replace Nero with Piso, was arrested, broke 
down (he was only twenty-six), and revealed the names of other conspirators, 
even, we are told, of his mother. When Nero confirmed his death sentence he 
recovered his courage, summoned his friends to a feast, ate with them heartily, 
opened his veins, and recited his lines against despotism as he bled to death (65). 


II. PETRONTUS 

We are not certain— it is only the general opinion— that the Petronius 
whose Satyricon still finds many readers was the Caius Petronius who died 
by Nero’s orders a year after Lucan. The book itself contains not a word 
to serve as a clue; and Tacitus, who describes the arbiter elegantiarum with 
pithy eloquence, makes no mention of the disreputable masterpiece. Some 
forty epigrams are ascribed to a Petronius, including a line that almost sums 
up Lucretius: primus in orbe deos fecit thtwr— ‘it was fear that first in the 



THE SILVER AGE 


CHAP. XIV ) 


297 


world made gods”; ® but these fragments too are silent about the author’s 
identity. 

The Satyricon was a collection of satires, probably in sixteen books, of 
which only the last two remain, themselves incomplete. They are saturae 
in the Latin sense of medleys— here of prose and verse, adventure and phi- 
losophy, gastronomy and venery. The form owes something to the satires 
of Menippus, a Syrian Cynic who wrote in Gadara about 60 b.c., and to the 
“Milesian Tales,” or love romances, that had become popular in the 
Hellenistic world. As all extant examples of these are later than Petronius, 
the Satyricon has the distinction of being the oldest known novel. 

It is hardly credible that an aristocratic lord of luxury, and master of 
fine taste, should have fathered a book so profusely vulgar as the Satyricon. 
All its active characters are plebeians, ex-slaves, or slaves, and all the scenes 
are of low life; here the Augustan preoccupation of literature with the 
upper classes is violently ended. Encolpius, who tells the tale, is an adulterer, 
a homosexual, a liar, and a thief, and takes it for granted that aU sensible 
men are the same. “We had it understood between ourselves,” he says of 
himself and his friend, “that whenever opportunity came we would pilfer 
whatever we could lay our hands upon, for the improvement of our 
common treasury.” * The story begins in a brothel, where Encolpius meets 
Ascyltos, who has taken refuge there from a lecture on philosophy. Their 
escapades among the towns and trolls of southern Italy form the thread 
of the wandering narrative; their rivalry for the handsome slave boy Giton 
unites and divides them in picaresque romance. At last they come to the 
house of the merchant Trimalchio; and the rest of the extant work is given 
over to describing the Cena Trimalchionis, the most astounding dinner 
in Hterature. 

Trimalchio is an ex-slave who has made a fortune, has bought enormous 
latijimdia, and lives in parvenu luxury with the appointments of a palace 
and the atmosphere of a stew. His estates are so vast that a daily gazette must 
be written to keep him abreast of his earnings. He begs his guests to drink: 

If the wine don’t please you I’ll change it. I don’t have to buy it, 
thank the gods. Everything here that makes your mouth water was 
produced on one of my country places, which I’ve never yet seen; 
but they tell me it’s down Terracina and Tarentum way. I’ve got a 
notion to add Sicily to my other little holdings, so in case I want to 
go to Africa I’ll be able to sail along my own coasts. . . . When it 
comes to silver I’m a connoisseur; I have goblets as big as wine jars. 

... I own a thousand bowls that Mummius left to my patron. . . . 

I buy cheap and sell dear; others may have different ideas.® 



298 CAESAR AND CHRIST (CHAP. XIV 

He is a kindly fellow withal; he shouts at his slaves, but he pardons them 
readily. He has so many that only a tenth of them know him by sight. 
“Slaves are men,” he says, generously remembering his origin; “they sucked 
the same milk that we did . . . and mine will drink the water of freedom 
if they live.” To prove his intentions he has his will brought in and reads 
it to his guests. It includes specifications for his epitaph, which is to end with 
the proud claim that he “grew rich from little, left 30,000,000 sesterces, and 
never heard a philosopher.” ® 

Forty pages describe the dinner; a few sentences will convey its aroma: 

There was a circular tray around which were displayed the signs 
of the zodiac, and upon each sign the caterer had placed the food best 
in keeping with it. Ram’s vetches on Aries, beef on Taurus . . . the 
womb of an unfarrowed sow on Virgo ... on Libra a balance hold- 
ing a tart in one pan and a cake in the other. . . . Four dancers ran 
in to music, and removed the upper part of the tray. Beneath it . . . 
stuffed capons and sows’ bellies, and in the middle a hare. At the 
comers four figures of Marsyas spouted from their bladders a highly 
spiced sauce upon fish which were swimming about. ... A tray fol- 
lowed on which was served a wild boar; from its tusks hung baskets 
loaded with dates; around it were little suckling pigs made of pastry. 

. . . When the carver plunged his knife into the boar’s side, thrushes 
flew out, one for each guest.'^ 

Three white hogs walk into the room, and the guests choose which one 
they will have cooked for them; while they eat, the winning hog is roasted; 
soon it re-enters; when it is carved, sausages and meat puddings emerge 
from its belly. When the dessert arrives Encolpius has no stomach for it; 
but Tiimalchio urges his guests onward by assuring them that the dessert 
has been made entirely out of a hog. A hoop is lowered from the ceiling, 
bringing to each diner an alabaster jar filled with perfume, while slaves 
replenish empty glasses with ancient wines. Trimalchio gets drunk and 
makes love to a boy; his fat wife protests, and he throws a cup at her head. 
“This Syrian dancing whore,” he says of her, “has a poor memory. I took 
her off the auction block and made her a woman, and now she puffs herself 
up like a frog. , . . But that’s the way it is: if you’re bom in an attic you 
can’t sleep in a palace.” ® And he bids his major-domo keep her statue off 
his tomb, “else I’ll be nagged even after I’m dead.” 

It is a powerful and savage satire; realistic only in its details, and probably 
true of only a small segment of Roman life. If Nero’s Petronius wrote it 
we must count it the merciless caricature of the nouveau riche freedman 
by a patrician who had never earned his keep. There is no mercy in the 
book, no tenderness, no ideal; immorality and cormption are taken for 



THE SILVER AGE 


299 


CHAP. XIV) 

granted, and the life of the underworld is presented with gusto, without 
indignation, and without comment. Here the gutter flows directly into 
classic literature, bringing its own judgments and taste, its own lusty vocabu- 
lary and hilarious vitality. Sometimes the story rises to those sublime heights 
of nonsense, obscenity, and vituperation which crown the epic of Gargantua 
and Pantagruel. Apuleius’ Golden Ass would follow in its steps; Gil Bias, 
seventeen centuries later, would rival it; Tristrain Shandy and Tom Jones 
would continue its meandering tradition. It is the strangest book in the 
literature of Rome. 


III. THE PHILOSOPHERS 

In this loose and complex age, when freedom was so limited and life was 
so free, philosophy flourished alongside of sensuality, and the two were not 
above joining hands. The decay of the native religion had left a moral 
vacuum which philosophy sought to fill. Parents sent their sons, and them- 
selves often went, to hear the lecmres of men who offered to provide a 
rational code of civilized conduct, or a formal dress for naked desire. Those 
who could afford it paid philosophers to live with them, partly as educators, 
partly as spiritual counselors, partly as learned company; so Augustus had 
Areus, consulted him on almost everything, and for his sake (if we may 
believe a ruler) was lenient to Alexandria, \\flien Drusus died Livia called in 
“her husband’s philosopher”— so Seneca phrases it— “to help her bear her 
grief.”® Nero, Trajan, and of course Aurelius had philosophers residing 
with them at court, as kings have chaplains now. In their last moments men 
would summon philosophers to chart their passing, as cenmries later they 
would ask for a priest.^® 

The public never forgave these teachers of wisdom for taking salaries or fees. 
Philosophy was esteemed a sufficient substitute for food and drink, and philoso- 
phers who had a less exalted opinion of their profession were the butt of popular 
jokes, of Quintilian’s criticism, of Lucian’s satire, and of imperial hostility. Many 
of them deserved it, for they put on the philosopher’s coarse cloak, and grew a 
profound beard, to give a learned front to gluttony, avarice, and vanity. “A 
short survey of life,” says a character in Lucian, 

had convinced me of the absurdity and meanness . . . that pervade 
all worldly purposes. ... In this state of mind the best I could think 
of was to get at the truth of it all from the . . . philosophers. So I 
selected the best of them— if solemnity of visage, pallor of complexion, 
and length of beard are a criterion . . . I placed myself in their hands. 

For a considerable sum down, and more to be paid when they had per- 
fected me in wisdom, I was to be . . . instructed in the order of the 



300 CAESAR AND CHRIST ( CHAP. XIV 

universe. Unfortunately, so far from dispelling my previous igno- 
rance, they perplexed me more and more with their daily drenches of 
beginnings and ends, atoms and voids, matters and forms. My greatest 
difficulty was that, though they differed among themselves, and all 
they said was full of contradictions, they expected me to believe 
them, each pulling me in his own direction. . . . Often one of them 
could not tell you correctly the number of miles from Megara to 
Athens, but had no hesitation about the distance in feet from the sun 
to the moon.^^ 

Most of the Roman philosophers followed the Stoic creed. The epicureans 
were too busy pursuing wine, woman, and food to have much time for theory. 
Here and there in Rome were mendicant preachers of the Cynic philosophy, 
ignoring speculation, and calling men to a simple and soapless life; they acceded 
to the popular demand that philosophers should be poor, and were in conse- 
quence the least respected of the schools. Seneca, however, made one of them 
his intimate friend. “Why should I not hold Demetrius in high esteem?” he 
asked. “I have found that he lacks nothing;” and the millionaire sage marveled 
when the nearly naked Cynic refused a gift of 200,000 sesterces from Caligula.^” 

Since the Roman Stoic was a man of action rather than of contemplation, he 
eschewed metaphysics as a hopeless quest, and sought in Stoicism a philosophy of 
conduct that would support human decency, family unity, and social order 
independently of supernatural surveillance and command. The essence of his 
code was self-control: he would subordinate passion to reason, and train his will 
to desire nothing that would make his peace of soul contingent upon external 
goods. In politics he would recognize the universal brotherhood of man under 
the fatherhood of God; at the same time he would love his country and hold 
himself ready to die at any time to avert its disgrace or his own. Life itself was 
always to remain within his choice; he was free to leave it whenever it should 
become an evil rather than a boon. A man’s conscience was to be higher than 
any law. Monarchy was a sad necessity for the rule of wide and diverse realms; 
but to kill a despot was an excellent thing. 

Roman Stoicism had at first profited from the Principate; the limitations on 
pohtical freedom had driven men from the forum to the study, and had inclined 
the finest of them to a philosophy that made the self-controlled subject more 
sovereign than the impassioned king. The government did not check freedom 
of thought or speech so long as these made no public attack upon the emperor, 
his family, or the official gods. But when the professors and their Senatorial 
patrons began to denounce tyranny, there arose between philosophy and au- 
tocracy a war that lasted till the adoptive emperors united them on the throne. 
When Nero ordered Thrasea to die (65), he at the same time exiled Thrasea’s 
friend Musonius Rufus, the most sincere and consistent of the Stoic philosophers 
in first-century Rome. Rufus had defined philosophy as inquiry into right 
conduct, and had taken his quest seriously. He denounced concubinage despite 
its legality, and demanded of men the same standard of sexual morality that they 



THE SILVER AGE 


CHAP. XIV) 


301 


required of women. Sexual relations, said this ancient Tolstoiari, were permis- 
sible only in marriage and for procreation. He believed in equal educational 
opportunities for both sexes and welcomed women to his lectures; but he bade 
them seek from education and philosophy the means of perfecting themselves as 
women.^® Slaves, too, attended his classes; one of them— Epictetus— honored his 
teacher by surpassing him. When civil war flared in Rome after Nero’s death, 
Musonius went out to the attacking army and lectured it on the blessings of 
peace and the horrors of war. Antonius’ troops laughed at him and resumed the 
ultimate arbitrament. Vespasian, in expelling the philosophers from Rome, ex- 
cepted Rufus; but he kept his concubines. 


IV. SENECA 

The Stoic philosophy found its most doubtful expression in the life, its 
most perfect expression in the writings, of Lucius Annaeus Seneca. Bom at 
Corduba about 4 B.c., he was soon taken to Rome, and received all the 
education available there. He imbibed rhetoric from his father, Stoicism 
from Attains, Pythagoreanism from Sotion, and practical pohtics from 
his aunt’s husband, the Roman governor of Egypt. He tried vegetarianism 
for a year, then gave it up, but remained always abstemious in food and 
drink; he was a millionaire in his surroundings rather than in his habits. He 
suffered so much from asthma and weak lungs that he often contemplated 
suicide. He practiced law, and was chosen quaestor about a.d. 33. Two years 
later he married Pompeia Paulina, with whom he Hved in remarkable con- 
tinuity until his death. 

On inheriting his father’s fortune he abandoned the law and indulged 
himself in writing. When Cremutius Cordus was forced by Caligula to 
kill himself (40) , Seneca addressed to Cordus’ daughter Marcia a consolatio 
—an essay of condolence which was a regularly practiced form in the 
schools of rhetoric and philosophy. Caligula wished to have him executed 
for his impertinence, but Seneca’s friends saved his life by arguing that he 
would presently die of consumption in any case. Soon afterward Claudius 
accused him of improper relations with Juha, daughter of Germanicus; the 
Senate condemned him to death, but Claudius commuted this to exile in 
Corsica. On that rugged isle, amid a population as primitive as in Ovid’s 
Tomi, the philosopher spent eight lonely years (41-49). At first he took 
his misfortune with true stoic calm, and comforted his mother with a 
touching Consolatio ad Helviam; but as the bitter years crawled on, his 
spirit broke, and he addressed to Claudius’ secretary a Consolatio ad 
Polybium in a humble appeal for pardon. When this failed he tried to dull 
his sufferings by composing tragedies. 



302 


CAESAR AND CHRIST 


(chap. XIV 

These strange productions, in which almost every character is an orator, were 
probably intended for the study rather than the stage; we do not hear of any of 
them being played; at most some brilliant episodes or resounding speeches were 
put to music and acted by a mime. The gentle philosopher incarnadines the stage 
with violence, as if he would rival in the theater the blood feasts of the games. 
Despite these heroic efforts he is too much of a thinker to be a good dramatist: 
he prefers ideas to men, and loses no chance for reflection, sentiment, or epigram. 
His plays contain some fine lines, but for the rest they may be forgotten with 
impunity. It should be added, however, that many good judges have not agreed 
with this verdict. Scaliger, lord of Renaissance critics, preferred Seneca to 
Euripides. When ancient literature came back to life it was Seneca who served 
as model for the first dramas in modem speech; from him came the classic 
form and unities that marked the plays of ComeUle and Racine and dominated 
the French stage till the nineteenth century. In England, which felt his influence 
less, the translation of Seneca’s dramas by Heywood ( 1559) gave an exemplar to 
the first English tragedy, Gorboduc, and left its mark on Shakespeare. 

In 48 the younger Agrippina replaced Messalina in power over Claudius 
and Rome. Anxious to turn her eleven-year-old son Nero into an Alexander, 
she looked about for an Aristotle and found him in Corsica. She had Seneca 
recalled and restored to his seat in the Senate. For five years he tutored the 
youth and for five more he guided the Emperor and the state. During this 
decade he wrote for the edification of Nero and sundry some genial exposi- 
tions of the Stoic philosophy— Ow Anger, On the Brevity of Life, On the 
Tranquillity of the Soul, On Clemency, On the Happy Life, On the Con- 
stancy of the Sage, On Benefits, On Providence. These formal treatises do 
not show him at his best. Like his plays they gleam with epigrams; but 
these, sent forth page after page in a staccato jet, at last weary the mind and 
lose their charm. Seneca’s pubhc, however, read these essays at intervals, 
and did not resent the gay wit that displeased the austere Q uintilian /* or 
the “sugar plums” and “glaring patches” that would offend Fronto’s archaic 
taste; it was pleased that their rich premier spoke so amiably, and, like his 
pupil, tried so hard to win its applause. For many years Seneca was the 
leading author, statesman, and vinegrower of Italy. 

He multiphed his patrimony by investments that apparently took full 
advantage of his official position and knowledge. If we may believe Dio, he 
lent money to provincials at such high interest that panic and insurrection 
broke out in Britain when he suddenly called in his loans there in the sum 
of 40,000,000 sesterces,^® His fortune, we are told, rose to 300,000,000 
($30,000,000).*® In 58 an old delator friend of Messalina, Publius Suilius, 
publicly attacked the premier as a “hypocrite, an adulterer, and a wanton; 
a man who denounces courtiers and never leaves the palace; who denounces 



THE SILVER AGE 


CHAP. XXV) 


303 


luxury, and displays 500 dining tables of cedar and ivory; who denounces 
wealth, and sucks the provinces dry by usury.” Like Caesar, Seneca con- 
tented himself with a rebuttal when he might have arranged an execution. 
In his essay On the Happy Life he repeated the charges, and replied that the 
sage is not bound to poverty; if wealth comes to h im honestly he may take 
it; but he must be capable of abandoning it at any time without serious 
regret.^® Meanwhile he lived ascetically amid his fine furniture, slept on a 
hard mattress, drank only water, and ate so sparingly that when he died his 
body was emaciated through undernourishment.^® “Abundance of food,” 
he wrote, “dulls the wits; excess of food strangles the soul.” ^ The charges 
of sexual irregularity were probably true of his youth, but he was noted 
for his unfailing tenderness to his wife. In truth he never made up his mind 
which he loved better— philosophy or power, wisdom or pleasure; and he 
was never convinced of their incompatibility. He admitted that he was a 
very imperfect sage. “I persist in praising not the fife that I lead, but that 
which I ought to lead. I follow it at a mighty distance, crawling” of 
which of us is this not true? If he is not sincere in saying that “mercy 
becomes no man so well as the king or the prince,” he at least phrases 
the sentiment almost as well as Portia. He condemned gladiatorial combats 
to the death,®* and Nero forbade them. He disarmed much criticism by 
what Tacitus calls “the grace with which he imparted wisdom.” He did 
not demand, any more than he practiced, perfection. 

We have seen that he ruled the Empire well, and that he tarnished his 
record by condoning the worst of Nero’s crimes, “letting much evil pass in 
order to have the power of doing a little good.” He felt disgraced, and 
longed to free himself from his imperial servitude; he described the Em- 
peror’s palace as triste ergastulum—‘zn unhappy prison for slaves.” He 
began to wish that he had devoted all his life, to the study of wisdom and 
had shunned the dark labyrinths of power. With pleasure he would put 
aside, now and then, the cares of politics, and at sixty attend like an eager 
youth the lectures of Metronax on philosophy.®® In the year 62, aged sixty- 
six, he begged leave to resign his reduced place in the government, but Nero 
would not let him go. After the great fire of 64, when Nero asked all the 
Empire to send contributions for the rebuilding of Rome, Seneca donated 
the greater part of his fortune. Gradually he succeeded in withdrawing 
from the court; more and more he lived in his Campanian villas, hoping by 
an almost monastic seclusion to escape the attentions and spies of the 
Emperor. For a time he lived on wild apples and running water for fear 
of poison in his food. 

It was in this atmosphere of leisurely terror that he wrote (63-65) his 
studies in natural science (Qmestiones Naturales), and the most lovable 



304 CAESAR AND CHRIST (cHAP. XIV 

of his works, the Epistulae Alorales. They were casual, intimate causeries 
addressed to his friend Lucilius— rich governor of Sicily, poet, philosopher, 
and frank Epicurean. There are few books in Roman hterature more 
pleasant than these urbane attempts to adapt Stoicism to the needs of a 
milHonaire. Here begins the informal essay, which would be the favorite 
medium of Plutarch and Lucian, Montaigne and Voltaire, Bacon and Addi- 
son and Steele. To read these letters is to be in correspondence with an 
enlightened, humane, and tolerant Roman who has reached the heights 
and known the depths of literature, statesmanship, and philosophy. They 
are Zeno speaking with Epicurus’ lenience and Plato’s charm. Seneca apolo- 
gizes to Lucihus for the carelessness of his style (it is nevertheless delectable 
Latin) : “I want my letters to you to be just what my conversation would 
be if you and I were sitting or walking together.” “I write this,” he adds, 
“not for the many but for you; each of us is sufficient audience to the 
other” (satis magnum alter alteri theatrum swnms) though the old dip- 
lomat doubtless hoped that posterity would eavesdrop on his talk. He de- 
scribes his asthma vividly but without self-pity; he cheerfully calls it 
“practicing how to die” by taking “last gasps” for an hour. He is sixty-seven 
now, but only in body: “my mind is strong and alert; it takes issue with me 
on the subject of old age; it declares that old age is its period of bloom,” 
He rejoices that he has time at last to read the good books he has had so 
long to put aside. Apparently he now reread Epicurus, for he quotes him 
with a frequency and an enthusiasm scandalous in a Stoic. He is frightened 
by the excesses of individualism and self-indulgence in Caligula, Nero, and 
thousands more; he wishes to offer some counterweight to the temptations 
that beset minds hberated before moral maturity; and he seems resolved 
to confute the epicureans out of the mouth of the master whose name they 
abused and whose doctrine they dared not understand. 

The first lesson of philosophy is that we cannot be wise about everything. 
We are fragments in infinity and moments in eternity; for such forked 
atoms to describe the universe, or the Supreme Being, must make the 
planets tremble with mirth. Therefore Seneca has little use for metaphysics 
or theology. One may prove out of his wnitings that he was a monotheist, 
a polytheist, a pantheist, a materialist, a Platonist, a monist, a dualist. Some- 
times God is to him a personal Providence who watches over all, “loves good 
men,” answers their prayers, and helps them by divine grace; in other 
passages God is the Eirst Cause in an unbroken chain of causes and effects, 
and the ultimate force is Fate, “an irrevocable cause which carries along 
human and divine affairs equally . . . leading the willing and dragging the 
unwilling along.” A hke indecision obscures his conception of the soul: 
it is a finely material breath animating the body; but it is also “a god dwell- 



THE SILVER AGE 


CHAP. XIV) 


305 


ing as a guest” in the human frame.®^ He speaks hopefully of a life beyond 
death, where knowledge and virtue will be perfected; and again he calls 
immortality “a beautiful dream.” In truth Seneca has never thought these 
matters out to a consistent (or public) conclusion; he talks of them with 
the cautious inconsistency of a politician who agrees with everybody. He 
has followed too successfully his father’s oratorical lessons, and expresses 
every point of view with irresistible eloquence. 

The same hesitations mar and grace his moral philosophy. He is too Stoic 
to be practical, and too lenient to be Stoic. He sees about him an immorality 
that exhausts the body and debases the soul, never satisfying either; avarice 
and luxury have destroyed peace and health, and power has made man 
only an abler brute. How shall one free himself from this ignominious 
agitation? 


I read in Epicurus today; “If you would enjoy real freedom you 
must be the slave of philosophy.” The man who submits to her is 
emancipated there and then. . . . The body, once cured, often ails 
again . . . but the mind, once healed, is healed for good and all. 
I shaU tell you what I mean by health: if the mind is content and con- 
fident; if it understands that those things for which all men pray, all 
the benefits that are sought or bestowed, are of no importance in 
relation to a life of happiness. . . . I shall give you a rule by which to 
measure yourself and your development: in that day you will come 
into your own when you realize that the successful are of all men 
most miserable.^® 


Philosophy is the science of wisdom, and wisdom is the art of living. 
Happiness is the goal, but virtue, not pleasure, is the road. The old ridiculed 
maxims are correct and are perpetually verified by experience; in the long 
run honesty, justice, forbearance, kindliness, bring us more happiness than 
ever comes from the pursuit of pleasure. Pleasure is good, but only when 
consistent with virtue; it cannot be a wise man’s goal; those who make it 
their end in life are like the dog that snaps at every piece of meat thrown 
to it, swallows it whole, and then, instead of enjoying it, stands with jaws 
agape anxiously awaiting more.^^ 

But how does one acquire wisdom? By practicing it daily, in however 
modest a degree; by examining your conduct of each day at its close; by 
being harsh to your own faults and lenient to those of others; by associating 
with those who excel you in wisdom and virtue; by taking some acknowl- 
edged sage as your invisible counselor and judge. You will be helped by 
reading the philosophers; not outline stories of philosophy, but the original 
works; “give over hoping that you can skim, by means of epitomes, the 
wisdom of distinguished men.” “Every one of these men will send you 



CAESAR AISTD CHRIST 


306 


(chap. XIV 


away happier and more devoted, no one of them will allow you to depart 
empty-handed. . . . What happiness, and what a noble old age, await him 
who has given himself into their patronage! ” Read good books many times, 
rather than many books; travel slowly, and not too much; “the spirit can- 
not mature into unity unless it has checked its curiosity and its wander- 
ings.” “The primary sign of a well-ordered mind is a man’s ability to 
remain in one place and linger in his own company.” Avoid crowds. “Men 
are more wicked together than separately. If you are forced to be in a 
crowd, then most of aU you should withdraw into yourself.” 

The final lesson of the Stoic is contempt and choice of death. Life is not 
always so joyful as to merit continuance; after life’s fitful fever it is well 
to sleep. “What is baser than to fret at the threshold of peace?” If a man 
finds life grievous, and can leave it without serious injury to others, he 
should feel free to choose his own time and way. Seneca preaches suicide 
to Lucilius as if he were Lucilius’ heir: 


This is one reason why v/e cannot complain of life; it keeps no one 
against his will. . . . You have had veins cut for the purpose of re- 
ducing your weight. If you would pierce your heart, a gaping wound 
is not necessary; a lancet will open the way to freedom, and tranquil- 
lity can be purchased at the cost of a pinprick.^® . . . Wherever you 
look, there is an end to troubles. Do you see that precipice?— it is a 
descent to liberty. Do you see that river, that cistern, that sea?— 
freedom is in their depths.®^ . . . But I am running on too long. 

How can a man end his life if he cannot end a letter? As for 

me, my dear Lucilius, I have lived long enough. I have had my fill. 

I await death. Farewell.®® 

Life took him at his word. Nero sent a tribune to seek his answer to the 
charge that he had plotted to make Piso emperor; Seneca replied that he was 
no longer interested in politics, and sought nothing but peace and the 
opportunity to attend to “a weak and crazy constitution.” “He showed no 
symptom of fear,” reported the tribune, “no sign of sorrow ... his words 
and looks bespoke a mind serene, erect, and firm.” “Return,” said Nero, 
“and tell him to die.” “Seneca heard the message,” says Tacitus, “with calm 
composure.” He embraced his wife, and bade her be comforted by the 
honorableness of his life and the lessons of philosophy. But Paulina refused 
to outlive him; when his veins were opened she had hers opened too. He 
called for a secretary and dictated a letter of farewell to the Roman people. 
He asked and received a drink of hemlock, as if resolved to die like Socrates. 
As the physician placed him in a warm bath to ease his pain he sprinkled the 
nearest servants with the water, saying “a libation to Jove the Deliverer”; 
and after much suffering he passed away (65). At Nero’s command the 



THE SILVER AGE 


CHAP. XIV) 


307 


physician, forcibly bound Paulina’s wrists and stopped the flow of her 
blood; she survived her husband a few years, but her perpetual pallor re- 
called her stoic resolution. 

Death glorified Seneca and made one generation forget his poses and his 
inconsistencies. Like all Stoics he underestimated the power and value 
of feeling and passion, exaggerated the worth and reliability of reason, and 
trusted too much to a nature in whose soil grow all the flowers of evil as 
well as of good. But he made Stoicism human, brought it down livably 
within the scope of men, and formed it into a spacious vestibule to Christi- 
anity. His pessimism, his condemnation of the immorality of his time, his 
counsel to return anger with kindness,®^ and his preoccupation with death 
made Tertullian call him “ours,” and led Augustine to exclaim, “What 
more could a Christian say than this pagan has said?”®^ He was not a 
Christian; but at least he asked for an end to slaughter and lechery, called 
men to a simple and decent hfe, and reduced the distinctions between free- 
man, freedman, and slave to “mere titles bom of ambition or of wrong.” 

It was a slave in Nero’s court, Epictetus, who profited most from his teach- 
ing. Nerva and Trajan were in some measure molded by his writings and 
inspired by his example to conscientious and humanitarian statesmanship. 
To the end of antiquity and through the Middle Ages he remained popular; 
and when the rebirth came Petrarch placed him next to Virgil and upon 
Seneca’s prose devotedly modeled his own. Montaigne’s brother-in-law 
translated him into French, and Montaigne quoted him as fondly as Seneca 
quoted Epicurus. Emerson read him again and again and became an Amer- 
ican Seneca. There are few original ideas in him; but that may be forgiven, 
for in philosophy all truth is old, and only error is original. With all his 
faults he was the greatest of Rome’s philosophers and, at least in his books, 
one of the wisest and kindliest of men. Next to Qcero he was the most 
lovable hypocrite in history. 


V. ROMAN SCIENCE 


Therefore we have given him too much space; nevertheless, we have not 
finished with him yet, for he was also a scientist. In those fertile years between 
his retirement and his death he amused himself with Quaestiones Naturales, and 
sought natural explanations of rain, hail, snow, wind, comets, rainbows, earth- 
quakes, rivers, springs. In his drama Medea he had suggested the existence of an- 
other continent beyond the Adantic.®® With similar intuition, contemplating 
the overwhelming multitude of stars, he wrote, “How many an orb, moving in 
the depths of space, has never yet reached the eyes of men!” And he adds, 
clairvoyantly, “How many things our sons will learn that we cannot now sus- 



CAESAR AND CHRIST 


308 


(chap. XIV 


pect!— what others await centuries when our names will be forgotten! . . . 
Our descendants will marvel at our ignorance.” We do. Seneca, though always 
eloquent, adds little to Aristotle and Aratus, and borrows abundantly from 
Poseidonius. He believes in divination despite Cicero, lapses into ludicrous tele- 
ology despite Lucretius, and interrupts his science at every turn to inculcate 
morality; he passes skillfully from mussels to luxury, and from comets to de- 
generation. The Fathers of the Church liked this mixture of meteorology and 
morals, and made the Quaestiones Naturales the most popular textbook of science 
in the Middle Ages. 

There were a few men of scientific mind and interest in Rome, like Varro, 
Agrippa, Pomponius Mela, and Celsus; but they were scarce outside of geog- 
raphy, horticulture, and medicine. For the rest, science had not yet detached it- 
self from magic, superstition, theology, and philosophy; it consisted of collected 
observations and traditions, seldom of fresh inquiry into facts, and rarely of ex- 
periment. Astronomy remained as Babylonia and Greece had left it. Time was 
still told by water clocks and sundials, and by the great obelisk that Augustus had 
stolen from Egypt and set up in the Field of Mars; its shadow, falling upon a 
pavement marked off in brass, indicated both the hour and the season.®® Day and 
night were variably defined by the rising and setting of the sun; each had twelve 
hours, so that an hour of the day was longer, and an hour of the night shorter, 
in summer than in winter. Astrology was almost universally accepted. Pliny 
noted that in his time (a.d. 70) both learned and simple believed that a man’s 
destiny was determined by the star under which he was bom.®'* They argued 
plausibly that vegetation, and perhaps the mating season in animals, depend upon 
the sun;* that the physical and moral qualities of people are aifected by climatic 
factors themselves determined by the sun; and that individual character and fate, 
like these general phenomena, are the result of celestial conditions inadequately 
known. Astrology was rejected only by the skeptics of the later Academy, who 
denied its pretended knowledge, and by the Christians, w ho scorned it as idolatry. 
Geography was studied more realistically, for navigation’s sake. Pomponius 
Mela (,4.D. 43 ) published maps on which the surface of the globe was divided into 
a central torrid zon^ and north and south temperate zones. Roman geographers 
knew Europe, southwestern and southern Asia, and northern Africa; of the re- 
mainder they had vague ideas and fantastic legends. Spanish and African skip- 
pers reached Madeira and the Canary Islands,®® but no Columbus rose to test 
Seneca’s dream. 


The most extensive, industrious, and unscientific product of Italian 
science was the Historia Natiiralis (77) of Caius Plinius Secundus. Though 
busy nearly all his life as soldier, lawyer, traveler, administrator, and head 
of the w'estern Roman fleet, he wrote treatises on oratory, grammar, and 
the javelin, a history of Rome, another of Rome’s wars in Germany, and— 


Many farmers today plant according to the phases of the moon. 



THE SILVER AGE 


CHAP. XIV) 


309 


sole survivor of this flood— thirty-seven “books” of natural history. How 
he managed all this in fifty-five years is explained in a letter of his nephew’s: 


He had a quick apprehension, incredible zeal, and an unequaled 
capacity to go without sleep. He would rise at midnight or at one, and 
never later than two in the morning, and begin his literary work. . . , 
Before daybreak he used to wait upon Vespasian, who likewise chose 
that season to transact business. When he had finished the affairs 
which the Emperor committed to his charge, he returned home to his 
studies. After a short light repast at noon ... he would frequently, 
in the summer, repose in the sun; but during that time some author 
was read to him, from whom he made extracts and notes ... as was 
his method with whatever he read. . . . Thereafter he generally 
went into a cold bath, took a light refreshment, and rested for a 
while. Then, as if it were a new day, he resumed his studies till dinner, 
when again a book was read to him, and he made notes. . . . Such 
was his manner of life amid the noise and hurry of the town. But in 
the country his whole time was devoted to study, except when he was 
actually bathing; all the while he Avas being rubbed and wiped he was 
employed in hearing some book read to him, or in dictating. In his 
journeys a stenographer constantly attended him in his chariot or 
sedan chair. ... He once reproved me for walking; “you need not 
have lost those hours,” he said, for he counted all time lost that was 
not given to study.®® 


His book, so sheared and sewn, was a one-man encyclopedia summariz- 
ing the science and errors of his age. “My purpose,” he says, “is to give a 
general description of everything that is known to exist throughout the 
earth.” ®’^ He deals with 20,000 topics and apologizes for omitting others; 
he refers to 2000 volumes by 473 authors, and admits his indebtedness by 
name with a candor exceptional in ancient literature; he notes, in passing, 
that he found many authors transcribing their predecessors word for word 
without acknowledgment. His style is dull, though sometimes purple, but 
we must not expect encyclopedias to be fascinating. 

Pliny begins by rejecting the gods; they are, he thinks, merely natural 
phenomena, or planets, or services, personified and deified. The sole god is 
Nature, i.e., the sum of natural forces; and this god apparently pays no 
special attention to mundane affairs.®® Pliny modestly refuses to measure the 
universe. His astronomy is a galaxy of absurdities (e.g., “In the war of 
Octavian against Antony the sun remained dim for almost a year” ®®) ; but 
he notes the aurora borealis,'® states with approximate modernity the orbital 
period of Mars, Jupiter, and Saturn as respectively two, twelve, and thirty 
years, and argues for the spherical form of the earth.'^^ He tells of islands 



CAESAR AND CHRIST 


310 


(chap. XIV 


rising from the Mediterranean in his time, and surmises that Sicily and 
Italy, Boeotia and Euboea, Cyprus and Syria, were gradually sundered by 
the patience of the sea.'^“ He treats of the laborious and servile mining of 
precious metals and regrets that “many hands are worn down that one little 
joint may be adorned.” He wishes that iron had never been found, since 
it has made war more terrible; “as if to bring death upon man more swiftly, 
we have given wings to iron and taught it to fly” referring to iron missiles 
equipped with leather feathers to help them keep their course. Following 
Theophrastus, he mentions under the name of anthracitts a “stone that 
bums,” but says no more about coal. He speaks of “an incombustible 
hnen,” called by the Greeks asbestinon, “which is used to embalm the 
cadavers of kings.” He describes or lists many animals, lauds their sagacity, 
and tells how to predetermine their sex: “If you wish to have females, let 
the dams face north while being covered.” He has twelve wondrous books 
on medicine— i.e., on the curative value of various minerals and plants. 
Books xx-xxv are a Roman herbal, which the Middle Ages passed down to 
form the initial plant lore of modern medicine. He offers cures for every- 
thing from intoxication and halitosis to “a pain in the neck’V® he provides 
“stimulants for the sexual passion,” and warns women against sneezing 
after coitus, lest they abort there and then.®^ He recommends coitus for 
physical weariness, hoarseness, pains in the loins, dim eyesight, melancholy, 
and “alienation of the mental faculties”;®® here is a panacea rivaling Bishop 
Berkeley’s tar water. Amid such nonsense occurs much useful information, 
especially about ancient industry, manners, or drugs; with interesting refer- 
ences to atavism, petroleum, and change of sex after birth. “Mucianus in- 
forms us that he once saw at Argos a person whose name was then Arescon, 
but had formerly been Arescusa; that this person had been married to a man, 
but that shortly afterward he developed a beard and other male character- 
istics, upon which he took a wife.” ®® Here and there valuable hints occur; 
e.g., Himly (1800) was led to investigate the action of jusquiamus and bella- 
donna on the pupil by reading in Pliny a passage about the use of anagallis 
juice before operations for cataract.®® There are precious chapters on paint- 
ing and sculpture, which constitute our oldest and principal account of 
ancient art. 

Pliny was not content with natural history; he wished also to be a philos- 
opher; and throughout his pages he scatters comments on mankind. The life 
of animals, he thinks, is preferable to man’s, for “they never think about 
glory, money, ambition, or death”; ®® they can learn without being taught 
and never have to dress; and they do not make war upon their own species. 
The invention of money w'as fatal to human happiness; it made interest pos- 
sible, by which some could live in idleness while others worked”;®^ hence 



THE SILVER AGE 


CHAP. XIV) 


3 ” 


the rise of great estates owned by absentee landlords, and the ruinous re- 
placement of tillage with pasturage. Life, in Pliny’s estimate, gives us much 
more grief and pain than happiness, and death is our supreme boon.®® After 
death there is nothing.®® 

The Natural History is a lasting monument to Roman ignorance. Pliny 
gathers superstitions, portents, love charms, and magic cures as assiduously 
as anything else, and apparently believes in most of them. He thinks that a 
man, especially if fasting, can kill a snake by spitting into its mouth.®® “It is 
well known that in Lusitania the mares become impregnated by the west 
wind” ®^— a point missed in Shelley’s ode. Phny condemns magic; but “on 
the approach of a menstruating woman,” he informs us, “must will sour and 
seeds touched by her will become sterile; and fruit wiU fall from the tree 
under which she sits. Her look will blunt the edge of steel and take the polish 
from ivory; if it falls upon a swarm of bees they will die at once.” ®® Pliny 
rejects astrology and then fills pages with “prognostics” derived from the 
behavior of the sun and the moon.®® “In the consulship of M. Acilius, and 
frequently at other times, it rained milk and blood.” ®^ When we reflect that 
this book, and Seneca’s Quaestiones, were the chief legacy of Roman natural 
science to the Middle Ages, and compare them with the corresponding 
works and temper of Aristotle and Theophrastus four hundred years earlier, 
we begin to feel the slow tragedy of a dying culture. The Romans had con- 
quered the Greek world, but they had already lost the most precious part 
of its heritage. 


VI. ROM.'VN MEDICINE 

They did better in medicine. Medical science too they borrowed from the 
Greeks, but they formulated it well, and applied it ably to personal and public 
hygiene. Rome, almost surrounded by marshes, and subject to mephitic floods, 
had particular need of public sanitation. About the second century b.c. we hear 
of malaria in Rome; the anopheles mosquito had settled down in the Pontine 
swamps.®® Gout spread as luxury increased; the younger Pliny tells how his 
friend Corellius Rufus suffered its pains from his thirty-third to his sixty-seventh 
year before committing suicide, just to have the pleasure of outliving by one 
day “that brigand Domitian.” ®® Some passages in the Roman satirists suggest 
the appearance of syphilis in the first century a.d.®^ Great epidemics swept central 
Italy in 23 b.c., a.d. 65, 79, and 166. 

The people had of old tried to meet disease and plague with magic and prayer; 
even now they begged the skeptical but complaisant Vespasian to heal their 
blindness with his spittle and their lameness with the touch of his foot.®* They 
brought their illnesses and votive offerings to the temples of Aesculapius and 
Minerva and many left gifts in gratitude for cures. But in the first century b.c. 
they turned more and more to secular medicine. There was as yet no state 



CAESAR AND CHRIST 


312 


(chap. XIV 


regulation of medical practice; shoemakers, barbers, carpenters, added it to 
their operations as they pleased, called in magic to their aid, and compounded, 
touted, and sold their own drugs.®® There were the usual satires and complaints. 
Pliny repeated old Cato’s imprecations upon Greek physicians who “seduce our 
wives, grow rich by feeding us poisons, learn by our suffering, and experiment 
by putting us to death.” ^®® Petronius, Martial, and Juvenal joined in the assault; 
and a century later Lucian would score incompetent practitioners who hide their 
incapacity under the elegance of their apparatus.^®^ 

Nevertheless, medicine, as we shall see, had made great progress in Alexandria, 
Cos, Tralles, Miletus, Ephesus, and Pergamum; and from these centers came 
Greek physicians who so raised the level of Roman practice that Caesar en- 
franchised the profession in Rome, and Augustus exempted it from taxation. 
Asclepiades of Prusa won the friendship of Caesar, Crassus, and Antony. He 
declared that the heart pumps blood and air through the body; rarely prescribed 
drugs or drastic purges; and accomplished impressive cures by hydrotherapy 
(baths, fomentations, enemas), massage, sunshine, exercise (walking, horseback 
riding), diet, fasting, and abstinence from meat. He was distinguished for his 
treatment of malaria, his operations on the throat, and his humane handling of 
the insane.'®® He gathered pupils about him and took some of them with him 
on his rounds. After his death they and similar students formed themselves into 
collegia and built for themselves a meeting place, on the Esquiline, called Schola 
Medicorimt. 

Under Vespasian audltoria were opened for the teaching of medicine, and 
recognized professors were paid by the state. Greek was the language of in- 
struction, as Latin is now the language of prescription, and for a like reason— 
its intelligibility to persons of diverse tongues. Graduates of these state schools 
received the title of mediciis a reptiblica, and after Vespasian they alone could 
legally practice medicine in Rome.'®® The lex Aquilia provided for state super- 
vision of physicians, and held them responsible for negligence; and the lex 
Cornelia severely punished practitioners whose carelessness or culpable ignorance 
caused the death of a patient.'"' Quacks continued, but sound practice increased. 
Midwives saw most Romans into the world, but many of these women were well 
trained.'®® About a . d . 100 military medicine reached its ancient zenith: every 
legion had twenty-four surgeons, first-aid and field-ambulance service were well 
organized, and hospitals were maintained near every important encampment.'"® 
Private hospitals {valetudinaria) were opened by physicians; from these evolved 
the public hospitals of the Middle Ages. Doctors were appointed and paid by 
the state to give free treatment to the poor.'"' Rich men kept their own physi- 
cians, and well-paid archiatri (“chief healers”) took care of the emperor, his 
family, his servants, and his aides. Sometimes families vmuld contract with a 
doctor to attend to their health and illnesses for a period of time; in this way 
Quintus Stertinius made 600,000 sesterces a year.'"® The surgeon Alcon, fined 
10,000,000 sesterces by Claudius, paid it with a few years’ fees.'"® 

The profession now reached a high degree of specialization. There were 



THE SILVER AGE 


CHAP. XIV) 


313 


urologists, gynecologists, obstetricians, ophthalmologists, eye and ear specialists, 
veterinarians, dentists. Romans could have gold teeth, wired teeth, false teeth, 
bridgework, and plates.^^® There were many women physicians; some of them 
wrote manuals of abortion, which were popular among great ladies and prosti- 
tutes. Surgeons were divided into further specialities and seldom engaged in 
general practice. Mandragora juice or atropin was used as an anesthetic.^^^ Over 
200 different surgical instruments have been found in the ruins of Pompeii. 
Dissection was illegal, but the examination of wounded or dying gladiators 
offered a frequent substitute. Hydrotherapy was popular; in a measure the great 
thermae were hydrotherapeutic institutes. Charmis of Marseilles made a fortune 
by administering cold baths. Consumptives were sent to Egypt or north Africa. 
Sulphur was used as a skin specific and to fumigate rooms after an infectious 
disease.^^^ Drugs were a final but frequent resort. Physicians made them by 
processes kept secret from the public and charged for them all that patients could 
be persuaded to pay.^^® Repulsive drugs were held in high honor: the offal of 
lizards was used as a purgative, human entrails were sometimes prescribed, An- 
tonins Musa recommended the excreta of dogs for angina, Galen applied a boy’s 
dung to swellings of the throat.^^^ In compensation for all this a cheerful quack 
offered to cure almost any ailment with wine.^^® 

Of the known medical writers in this age only one was a Roman, and he was 
not a physician. Aurelius Cornelius Celsus was an aristocrat who about a.d. 30 
gathered into an encyclopedia De Artibus his studies in agriculture, war, oratory, 
law, philosophy, and medicine; only the section De Medicma survives. It is the 
greatest work on medicine that has come down to us from the six centuries be- 
tween Hippocrates and Galen; it has also the distinction of being written in such 
pure and classical Latin that Celsus was dubbed Cicero medicorum. The Latin 
terms into which he translated the nomenclature of Greek medicine have ruled 
the science ever since. The sixth book shows considerable knowledge, in an- 
tiquity, of venereal disease. The seventh is an illuminating description of surgical 
methods; it contains the earliest known account of ligature, and describes ton- 
sillectomy, lateral lithotomy, plastic surgery, and operations for cataract. Al- 
together this is the soundest achievement in Roman scientific literature, and 
suggests that we might have a better opinion of Roman science if Pliny had not 
been preserved. It is a pity that scholarship has concluded that Celsus’ treatise 
is largely a compilation or paraphrase of Greek texts.^^® Lost in the Middle Ages, 
it was rediscovered in the fifteenth century, was printed before Hippocrates or 
Galen, and took a leading part in stimulating the reconstruction of medicine in 
modem times. 


VII. QUINTILIAN 

When Vespasian established a state professorship of rhetoric in Rome he 
appointed to it a man who, like so many authors of this Silver Age, was of 
Spanish birth. Marcus Fabius Quintilianus was bom at Calagurris (a.d. 35?), 



314 CAESAR AND CHRIST (CHAP. XIV 

went to Rome to study oratory, and opened a school of rhetoric there which 
numbered Tacitus and the younger Pliny among its pupils. Juvenal de- 
scribes him in his prime as handsome, noble, wise, well bred, with a fine voice 
and delivery, and a senatotial dignity. In old age he retired to write for the 
guidance of his son the classic treatment of his subject, the Institutio Ora- 
torla (96). 

I thought that this work would be the most precious part of the 
inheritance ol my son, whose ability was so remarkable that it called 
for the most anxious cultivation on the part of his father. , . . Night 
and day 1 pursued this design, and hastened its completion in the fear 
that death might cut me off with my task unfinished. Then misfortune 
overwhelmed me with such suddenness that the success of my labors 
now interests no one less than myself. ... I have lost him of whom 
I had formed the highest expectations, and in whom I reposed all the 
hopes that should solace my old age.^^^ 

His wife had died at nineteen, leaving him two sons; one of these had died at 
the age of five, “robbing me, as it were, of one of my two eyes”; now the 
other went, leaving the old teacher “to outlive all my nearest and dearest.” 

He defines rhetoric as the science of speaking well. The training of the 
orator should begin before birth: it is desirable that he should come of 
educated parents, so that he may receive correct speech and good manners 
from the very air he breathes; it is impossible to become both educated and 
a gentleman in one generation. The future orator should study music, to 
give him an ear for harmony; the dance, to give him grace and rhythm; 
drama, to animate his eloquence with gesture and action; gymnastics, to 
keep him in health and strength; literature, to form his style, train his 
memory, and arm him with a treasury of great thoughts; science, to acquaint 
him with some understanding of nature; and philosophy, to mold his char- 
acter on the dictates of reason and the precepts of wise men. For all prepara- 
tions will be of no avail unless integrity of conduct and nobility of spirit 
are present to generate an irresistible sincerity of speech. Then the student 
must write as much as possible and with the utmost care. It is a hard training, 
and “I trust,” says Quintilian, “that no one among my readers would think 
of calculating its monetary value.” 

The oration itself has five phases: conception, arrangement, style, memory, 
and delivery. Having chosen his subject and clearly conceived his purpose, 
let the orator gather his material, from observation, inquiry, and books, and 
arrange it both logically and psychologically— so that each part will be in its 
proper place and lead as naturally to the next as in geometry.^^® A well- 
organized address will consist of introduction {exordium), proposition, 
proof, refutation, and peroration. The speech should be written out only if 



THE SILVER AGE 


CHAP. XIV) 


315 


it is to be fully memorized; otherwise fragmentary memories of the written 
form will obstruct and confuse an extempore style. If it is written it must 
be with care. “Write quickly and you will never write well; write well, and 
you will soon write quickly”; shun the lazy “luxury of dictation now so 
fashionable among writers.” “Clearness is the first essential,” then brevity, 
beauty, and vigor. Correct repeatedly and stoically: 


Erasure is as important as writing. Prune what is turgid, elevate what 
is commonplace, arrange what is disorderly, introduce rhythm where 
the language is harsh, modify where it is too absolute. . . . The best 
method of correction is to put aside for a time what we have written, 
so that when we come to it again it may have an aspect of novelty, as 
of being another man’s work; in this way we may preserve ourselves 
from regarding our writings with the affection that we lavish upon a 
newborn child.^^^ 


Delivery, like composition, should touch the emotions, but avoid exuberant 
gesticulation. “It is feeling and force of imagination that makes us eloquent,” 
but “shout and bellow with uplifted hand, pant, wag your head, smite your 
hands together, slap your thigh, your breast, your forehead, and you will 
go straight to the heart of the dingier members of your audience.” 

To all this excellent counsel Quintilian adds, in his twelfth book, the best 
literary criticism that has sunfived from antiquity. He enters with zest into 
the ancient and modern war between the ancients and the moderns, and finds 
truth precariously in the middle. He does not, like Pronto, wish to return 
to the rude simplicity of Cato and Ennius, but still more he would shun the 
“voluptuous and affected” fluency of Seneca; he prefers, as a model for 
students, the virile yet polished speech of Cicero, the one Roman writer w'ho 
had in his line surpassed the Greeks.^^® Quintihan’s own style is often that 
of a schoolmaster, moribund with definitions, classification, and distinc- 
tions, and rising to eloquence only in denouncing Seneca; but it is a vigorous 
style, whose dignity is lightened now and then with touches of humanity 
and wit. Behind the good sense of the words we feel always the quiet good- 
ness of the man; it is a moral stimulus to read him. Perhaps the Romans who 
had the privilege of his instruction took from it some part of the moral 
renovation that, more than any brilliance of letters, ennobled the age of the 
younger Pliny and Tacitus. 


VIII. STATIUS AND MARTIAL 

We have left to the last two poets who belonged to the same epoch, sough" 
the favor of the same emperor and the same patrons, and yet never mention 



CAESAR AND CHRIST 


316 


(chap. XIV 


each other: one the purest, the other the coarsest, poet in the history of im- 
perial Rome. Publius Papinius Statius was the son of a Neapolitan poet and 
grammarian; his environment and his education gave him everything but 
money and genius. He lisped in numbers, startled salons with poetical im- 
provisations, and wrote an epic, the Thebaid, on the war of the Seven against 
Thebes. We cannot read it today, for its movement is obstructed with dead 
gods, and its smooth verses have an overpowering virtus dormitiva. But his 
contemporaries liked it; crowds gathered to hear him recite it in a Naples 
theater; they understood his mythological machinery, welcomed the deh- 
cacy of his sentiment, and found that his lines ran trippingly on the tongue. 
The judges in the Alban poetry contest gave him the first prize; rich men 
became his friends and helped him stave off penury;^^^ Domitian himself in- 
vited him to dinner in the domiis Flavia, and Statius repaid him by describing 
the palace as heaven and the Emperor as god. 

To Domitian and other patrons, to his father and his friends, he addressed 
the most pleasing of his poems, the Silvae, modest idyls and eulogies in light 
and happy verse. In the Capitoline games, however, another poet won the 
crown, Statius’ star waned in fickle Rome, and he persuaded his reluctant 
wife to return with him to his boyhood home. In Naples he began another 
epic, the Achilleid; then suddenly, in 96, he died, a youth of thirty-five. 
He was not a great poet; but he struck a welcome note of kindliness and 
tenderness amid a literature too often sarcastic and bitter, and a society 
corrupt and coarse beyond any precedent. He would have been as famous as 
Martial if he had been as obscene. 

Marcus Valerius Martialis was bom at Bilbilis in Spain in the fortieth year 
of our era. At twenty-four he came to Rome and won the friendship of 
Lucan and Seneca. Quintilian advised him to butter his bread by practicing 
law, but Martial preferred to starve on poetry. His friends were suddenly 
swept away in the conspiracy of Piso, and he was reduced to addressing his 
poems to rich men who might give him a dinner for an epigram. He lived 
in a third-floor garret, probably alone; for though he indites two poems to a 
woman whom he calls his wife, they are so foul that she must have been an 
invention or a bawd.^“® 

His poems, he lets us know, were read throughout the Empire, even among 
the Goths; he rejoices to learn that he was almost as famous as a racehorse, 
but he fretted to see his publisher enriched while he himself received nothing 
from the sale of his books. He descended to suggesting, in an epigram, that 
he badly needed a toga; the Emperor’s rich freedman Parthenius sent him 
one; he rephed in two stanzas, one of which celebrated the newness of the 
garment, the other its cheap worthlessness. In time he found some more gen- 
erous patrons; one gave him a little farm at Nomentum, and somehow he 



THE SILVER AGE 


CHAP. Xiv) 


317 


raised funds to buy a simple home on the Quirinal hill. He became a “client” 
or retainer to one rich man after another, waited upon them in the morning, 
and received an occasional gift; but he felt the shame of His situation and 
mourned that he did not have the courage to be contentedly poor and 
therefore free.^^^ He could not afford to be poor, for he had to mingle in the 
society of men who could reward his verse. He showered Domitian with 
lauds and announced that if Jupiter and Domitian were to invite him to din- 
ner on the same day he would turn down the god; but the Emperor pre- 
ferred Statius. Martial became jealous of the younger poet and suggested 
that a live epigram was worth more than a dead epic.^^® 

The epigram had till now been a pretty conceit on any passing subject, 
sometimes a dedication, a compliment, an epitaph; Martial molded it into a 
briefer, sharper form, barbed with satiric sting. We do him injustice when 
we read these 1561 epigrams in a few sittings; they were issued in twelve 
books at divers times, and the reader was expected to use them in small por- 
tions as hors d’oeuvres, not as a prolonged feast. Most of them seem trivial 
today; their allusion was local and temporary, too well timed to endure. 
Martial does not take them very seriously; the bad ones, he agrees, out- 
number the good, but he had to fill a volume.^^® He is a master of versifica- 
tion, knows all the meters and all the tricks of the poetic trade; but he avoids 
rhetoric as proudly as his prose patrician analogue, Petronius. He cares 
nothing for the mythological furniture that littered the literature of his age; 
he is interested in real men and women and their intimate life and describes 
them with relish and spite; “my pages,” he says, “taste of men.” He can 
“take down” some stiff aristocrat or stingy millionaire, some pompous 
lawyer or famous orator; but he likes better to tell of barbers, cobblers, 
hawkers, jockeys, acrobats, auctioneers, poisoners, perverts, and prostitutes. 
His scenes are laid not in ancient Greece but in the baths, the theaters, the 
streets, the circus, the homes, and tenements of Rome. He is the poet laureate 
of worthless men. 

He is more interested in money than in love, and most often thinks of the 
latter in one gender. There is some sentiment in him, and he speaks very 
tenderly of a friend’s child just dead; but there is no gallant line in his books, 
not even a noble wrath. He chants a litany of evil smells, and adds, “All 
these stenches I prefer to yours, Bassa.” He describes one of his mistressrs: 

Your tresses, Galla, are manufactured far away; you lay aside your 
teeth at night as you do your silk dresses; you lie stored away in a 
hundred caskets, and your face does not sleep with you; you wink 
with an eyebrow brought to you in the morning. No respect moves 
you for your outworn carcass, which you may now count as one of 
your ancestors.^®^ 



CAESAR AND CHRIST 


318 


(chap. XIV 


He writes with unmanl)t ven^efulness of the women who have refused him, 
and flings his epigrammatic mud at them with the delicacy of a scavenger. 
His love lyrics are addressed to boys; he climbs to ecstasy over the fragrance 
of “thy kisses, cruel lad,” One of his love poems begot a famous Enghsh 
counterpart: 

I do not love you, Sabidius, the reason I cannot tell; 

This only I can say— I dislike you very well.* 

Indeed there are many whom Martial does not hke. He describes them under 
transparent pseudonyms and in language that can be found today only on 
the most private public walls.^^® He is always hbeling his enemies, as Statius 
is always celebrating his friends. Some of his victims retaliated by publishing 
under his name poems filthier than his own, or attacking the men whom Mar- 
tial was anxious to please. From these technically perfect epigrams one could 
construct a full vocabulary of barroom urology. 

But Martial’s obscenity sits on him lightly. He shares it with his time, and 
never doubts that even highborn maidens in palace bowers will like it. 
“Lucretia blushed and laid down my volume, but Brutus was present. Brutus, 
go away; she will read it.” The poetic Hcense of the age allowed in- 
decencies, provided the meter and diction were correct. Sometimes Martial 
boasts of his lubricity; “no page of mine is without wantonness.” More 
often he is a bit ashamed of it, and begs us to beheve that his life is cleaner 
than his verse. 

At last he tired of purveying compliments and insults as a source of food; 
he began to long for a quieter, wholesomer hfe, and the haunts of his native 
Spain. He was now fifty-seven, with gray head and bushy beard, so swarthy 
that anyone, he tells us, could see at a glance that he had been born near the 
Tagus. He addressed a poetical bouquet to the younger Pliny and received 
in return a sum that paid his fare to Bilbilis. The little town welcomed him, 
forgiving his morals for his fame; he found simpler patrons there, but more 
open-handed than those at Rome. A kindly lady presented him with a modest 
villa, and there he spent his few remaining years. In loi Pliny wrote: “I have 
just heard of Martial’s death. The news has deeply grieved me. He was a 
man of wit, piquant and mordant, who mixed in his verse salt and honey, and 
rot least of aU, candor.” There must have been some secret virtue in the 
man if Pliny loved him. 


Non amo te, Sabidi, nec possum dicere quare; 
Hoc tanmm possum dicere, non amo te.i34 



CHAPTER XV 


Rome at Work 

AD. 14-96 


I. THE SOWERS 

T O the Silver Age belongs the classic Roman work on agriculture— the 
De Re Riistica (65) of Junius Columella. Like Quintilian, Martial, and the 
Senecas, he came from Spain; he farmed several estates in Italy and retired to a 
residence in Rome. The best lands, he found, were taken up by the villas and 
grounds of the rich; the next best by olive orchards and vineyards; only inferior 
soils were left for tillage. “We have abandoned the husbanding of our soil to 
our lowest slaves, and they treat it like barbarians.” The freemen of Italy, he 
thought, were degenerating in cities when they should have been hardening 
themselves by working the earth; “we ply our hands in circuses and theaters 
rather than among crops and vines.” Columella loved the soil, and felt that the 
physical culture of the earth is saner than the literary culture of the town; farm- 
ing “is a blood relative of wisdom” {consanguinea sapientiae). To lure men back 
to the fields he adorned his subject with polished Latin, and when he came to speak 
of gardens and flowers he fell into enthusiastic verse. 

It was in this period that Pliny the naturalist pronounced a premature epitaph: 
latifundia perdidere Italiam— “the large farms have ruined Italy.” Similar judg- 
ments occur in Seneca, Lucan, Petronius, Martial, and Juvenal. Seneca described 
cattle ranches wider than kingdoms, cultivated by fettered slaves; some estates 
were so large, said Columella, that their masters could never ride around them.^ 
Pliny mentions an estate with 41 17 slaves, 7200 oxen, and 257,000 other animals.- 
Land distributions by the Gracchi, Caesar, and Augustus had raised the number 
of small holdings, but many of these had been abandoned during the wars and 
bought in by the rich. When imperial administration reduced plunder in the 
provinces, much patrician wealth went into large farms. The latifundia spread 
because greater profits flowed from producing cattle, oil, and wine than from 
growing cereals and vegetables, and the discovery that ranching, to be most 
profitable, required the operation of large areas under one management. By the 
close of the first Christian century these advantages were being offset by the 
rising cost of slaves and their slow and uninventive work.® The long transition 
now began from slavery to serfdom. As peace diminished the flow of war cap- 
tives into bondage, some owners of large estates, instead of operating them with 
slaves, divided them into small holdings and leased these to free tenants (coloJih 

319 



320 CAESAR AND CHRIST (CHAP. XV 

cultivators) who paid in rent and labor. Most of the ager piiblicus belonging to 
the government was now worked in this way. So were the extensive properties 
of the younger Pliny, who describes his tenants as healthy, sturdy, good-natured, 
talkative peasants-precisely such as one finds throughout Italy today, unchanged 
after all changes. 

The modes and tools of tillage were essentially as they had been for centuries. 
Plow, spade, hoe, pick, pitchfork, scythe, rake, have preserved their forms almost 
unaltered for 3000 years. Com was ground in mills turned by water or by beasts. 
Screw pumps and water wheels raised water out of mines or into irrigation canals. 
Soils were protected by crop rotation, and fertilized by manure, alfalfa, clover, 
rye, or beans.^ Seed selection was highly developed. Skillful care drew three, 
sometimes four, harvests per year from the rich fields of the Campagna and the 
valley of the Po;® from one planting of alfalfa four to six crops could be cut 
yearly for ten years.® All but the rarest European vegetables were grown, some 
of them in greenhouses for the winter trade. Fruit and nut trees of every sort 
abounded, for Roman generals and merchants, and alien merchants and slaves, 
had brought in many new species; the peach from Persia, the apricot from Ar- 
menia, the cherry from Pontic Cerasus (whence its name), the grape from 
Syria, the damson (pruna damascena) from Damascus, the plum and filbert from 
Asia Minor, the walnut from Greece, the olive and fig from Africa. . . . Clever 
arboriculturists had grafted the walnut upon the arbutus, the plum upon the 
plane tree, the cherry upon the elm. Pliny enumerates twenty-nine varieties of 
figs grown in Italy.^ “Through the zeal of our farmers,” said Columella, “Italy 
has learned to produce the fruits of almost the whole world.” ® In turn it trans- 
mitted these arts to western and northern Europe. Our rich dietary has a wide 
geography and a long history behind it, and the very food that we eat may be 
part of our Oriental and classical heritage. 

Olive orchards were numerous, but vineyards were everywhere, beautifully 
terraced on the slopes. Italy produced fifty famous kinds of wine, and Rome alone 
drank 25,000,000 gallons per year— two quarts per week for each man, woman, 
and child, slave or free. Most wines were produced by capitalistic organization— 
by large-scale operations financed from Rome.® Much of the product was ex- 
ported and taught the graces of wine to beer-drinking countries like Germany 
and Gaul. During this fost century Spain, Africa, and Gaul began to grow their 
own grapes; Italian vintners lost one provincial outlet after another, and glutted 
their domestic market in one of the few “overproduction” crises of Roman econ- 
omy. Domitian tried to ease the situation, and restore cereal culture, by prohibit- 
ing the further plantings of vines in Italy and ordering half of all vineyards in the 
provinces destroyed.^® These edicts aroused a fury of protest and could not be 
enforced. In the second century the wines of Gaul and the oil of Spain, Africa, 
and the East began to crowd Italian products out of Mediterranean markets, 
and the economic decline of Italy began. 

A large part of the peninsula was given over to grazing. The cheapest soils and 



ROME AT WORK 


321 


CHAP. XV) 

slaves coiJd be used for the raising of cattle, sheep, and swine. Careful attention 
was paid to scientific breeding. Horses were bred chiefly for war, hunting, and 
sport, seldom as draft animals; oxen drew the plow and the cart, mules bore 
burdens on their backs. Cows, sheep, and goats gave three kinds of milk, from 
which the Italian made delectable cheeses then as now. Swine were herded in 
woods rich with acorns and nuts; Rome, said Strabo, lived chiefly on pork fat- 
tened in the oak forests of northern Italy. Poultry fertilized the farmyard and 
helped feed the family, while bees provided the ancient and honorable substitute 
for sugar. If we add some acres of flax and hemp, a little hunting and much fish- 
ing, we get a picture of the Italian countryside as it was nineteen hundred years 
ago, and is today. 


II. THE ARTISANS 

There was not in Roman life— and perhaps there would not be in a healthy 
economy— so geographical a division between agriculture and industry as 
in our modern states. The ancient rural home— cottage, villa, or estate— was 
literally a manufactory, where the hands of men carried on a dozen vital 
industries, and the skill of women filled the house and its environs with a 
score of wholesome arts. There the woods were turned into shelter, fuel, and 
furniture, cattle were slain and dressed, grain was milled and baked, oil and 
wine were pressed, food was prepared and preserved, wool and flax were 
cleaned and woven; sometimes clay was fired into vessels, bricks, and tiles, 
and metal was beaten into tools; life there had an educative fullness and 
variety that come to few of us in our time of wider movement and narrowing 
specialties. Nor was this diversity of occupation the sign of a poor and 
primitive economy; the wealthiest households were the most self-sufficient, 
and prided themselves on making the largest part of what they needed. A 
family was an organization of economic helpmates engaged in the united 
agriculture and industry of a home. 

When an artisan undertook to do a certain task for several families, and set up 
his shop at some center within reach of them all, village economy supplemented, 
but did not supersede, domestic industry. So the miller took and ground the 
grain of many fields; later he baked the bread, and finally he delivered it. Forty 
bakeries were unearthed at Pompeii, and at Rome the pastrymakers were a sepa- 
rate guild. There were likewise contractors who bought an olive crop on the 
trees and gathered the fruit;^^ most estates, however, continued to process their 
own oil and bake their own bread. The clothing of peasants and philosophers was 
homespun, but the well-to-do wore garments that, though woven at home, were 
carded, cleaned, bleached, and cut in a fullery. Some delicate woolen fabrics 
were woven in factories; and such flax as was not made into sails or nets was 



322 CAESAR AND CHRIST (CHAP. XV 

turned by factories into linen garments for women and handkerchiefs for men.^^ 
In its next stage the cloth might be sent to a dyer, who not only colored it but 
impressed upon it such delicate designs as we find on the costumes in Pompeian 
murals. Tanning of leather had also reached the factory stage, but shoemakers 
were usually individual craftsmen, making shoes to order; some were specialists 
who made only fancy slippers for feminine feet. 

The extractive industries were manned almost wholly by slaves or criminals. 
The gold and silver mines of Dacia, Gaul, and Spain, the lead and tin of Spain 
and Britain, the copper of Cyprus and Portugal, the sulphur of Sicily, the salt 
beds of Italy, the iron of Elba, the marble of Luna, Hymettus, and Paros, the 
porphyry of Egypt, and in general all subsoil natural resources, were owned by 
the state, were operated by it or on lease from it, and provided a main source of 
the national revenue; the gold of Spain alone yielded Vespasian $44,000,000 a 
year.^® The quest for minerals was a chief source of imperialist conquest; the 
mineral wealth of Britain, says Tacitus, was “the prize of victory” in Claudius’ 
campaign.^^ Wood and charcoal were the chief fuels. Petroleum was known in 
Commagene, Babylonia, and Parthia,^® and the defenders of Samosata threw it 
in flaming torches upon Lucullus’ troops; but there is no sign of its commercial 
use as a fuel.* Coal was found in the Peloponnesus and northern Italy, but was 
used chiefly by smiths.^® The art of carburizing iron into steel had now spread 
from Egypt throughout the Empire. Most ironworkers, coppersmiths, gold- 
smiths, and silversmiths had a single forge and worked with one or Uvo appren- 
tices. At Capua, Mintumae, Puteoli, Aquileia, Como, and elsewhere several forges 
and smelters were united in factories; those at Capua were apparently large-scale 
capitalist enterprises externally financed. 

The building trades were well organized and specialized. Dendrophoroi (“tree- 
bearers”) cut and delivered the wood, fabri lignarii (“woodworkers”) made 
houses and furniture, caementarii mixed the cement, striictores laid the founda- 
tions, arcimn built the arches, parietarU raised the walls, tectores applied plaster, 
albarii whitewashed it, artifices phcmbarii inserted the plumbing— usually with 
pipes of lead {plumbum), and marmorii paved marble floors; we may imagine the 
jurisdictional disputes. Bricks and tiles were provided by potteries, many of 
which had reached the factory stage. Trajan, Hadrian, and Marcus Aurelius 
owned such factories and made fortunes from them.^^ The kilns of Arretium, 
Mutina, Puteoli, Surrentum, and PoUentia supplied the ordinary tableware of all 
the European and African provinces as well as Italy. This wholesale production 
laid no claim to artistic excellence; the emphasis was now frankly on quantity; 
and the terra sigillata (“signed earthenware”) that now crowded the Italian 
market was distinctly inferior to the earlier product of Arretium. Outstanding 
work, as we shall see, was done in glass. 


• In the fourth century a fire dart filled with flaming naphtha, and shot from a bow or a 
catapult, was among the weapons of war. “It bums persistently wherever it falls,” says Am- 
mianus Marcellinus; “and water poured upon it rouses the fire to greater heat; and there is no 
way of extinguishing it except by sprinkling it with dust.” iSa 



ROME AT WORK 


CHAP. XV) 


323 


The factory production of glass, brick, tiles, pottery, and metalware does 
not warrant us in ascribing an industrial capitalism to ancient Italy. Rome 
itself had only two large factories— a paper mill and a dyeing establishment^® 
probably neither metals nor fuels were at hand in quantity, and the profits of 
pohtics seemed more honorable than the proceeds of industry. In the fac- 
tories of central Italy almost all the workers, and some of the managers, were 
slaves; in those of north Italy there was a greater proportion of freemen. 
Slaves were still sufficiently available to discourage the development of 
machinery; fistless slave labor, with small stake in the product, was not likely 
to make inventions; some labor-saving devices were rejected because they 
might have caused technological unemployment; and the purchasing power 
of the people was too low to stimulate or support mechanized production.^® 
There were of course many simple machines, common to Italy, Egypt, and 
the Greek world; screw presses, screw pumps, water wheels, animal-driven 
grain mills, spinning wheels, looms, the crane and pulley, the revolving mold 
for pottery. . . . But Italian fife was now (a.d. 96) as highly industrialized 
as fife was ever to be until the nineteenth century. It would hardly go further 
on the basis of slavery and a high concentration of wealth. Roman law con- 
tracepted large organizations by requiring every sharer in an industrial under- 
taking to be a legally responsible partner; it forbade “limited liability” 
companies and allowed joint-stock corporations only for the performance of 
governmental contracts. Since similar restrictions affected banks, these 
could seldom provide capital for large-scale enterprise. At no time would the 
industrial development of Rome or Italy equal that of Alexandria or the 
Hellenistic East. 


ni. THE CARRIERS 

From Caesar to Commodus wheeled vehicles were forbidden in Rome by day; 
people then walked, or were carried in slave-borne chairs or litters. For longer 
distances they traveled on horseback or in horse-drawn carriages or chariots. 
Travel by public stagecoach averaged some sixty miles a day. Caesar once rode 
by carriage 800 miles in eight days; messengers bearing the news of Nero’s death 
to Galba in Spain covered 332 miles in thirty-six hours; Tiberius, hurrying day and 
night, rode in three days 600 miles to stand beside his dying brother. The public 
post, by carriage or horse at all hours, averaged one hundred miles a day. Au- 
gustus had modeled it on the Persian system, as indispensable to imperial adminis- 
tration. It was called cursus publicus as serving the res publica, or commonwealth, 
by carrying official correspondence. Private individuals could use it only by rare 
and special permission through a government diploma (“double-folded”) or 
passport entitling the bearer to certain privileges and introducing him en route 
to persons of diplomatic importance. A more rapid means of communication was 



CAESAR AND CHRIST 


3H 


(chap. XV 


sometimes arranged by semaphores flashing signals from point to point; by this 
primitive telegraph the arrival of the grain ships at Puteoli was quickly made 
known to worried Rome. Nonofficial correspondence went by special courier 
or merchants or traveling friends; some traces suggest the existence, under the 
Empire, of private companies arranging to transmit private mail. Fewer letters 
were written than now, and better. Nevertheless, the movement of intelligence 
over western and southern Europe was as rapid in Caesar’s day as at any time 
before the railway. In 54 b.c. Caesar’s letter from Britain reached Cicero at Rome 
in twenty-nine days; in 1834 Sir Robert Peel, hurrying from Rome to London, 
required thirty days.^® 

Communication and transport were immensely aided by the consular roads. 
These were the tentacles of Roman law, the members by which the mind of 
Rome became the will of the realm. They achieved in the ancient world a com- 
mercial revolution comparable in kind with that which the railroads effected in 
the nineteenth century. Until steam transportation came, the roads of medieval 
and modern Europe were inferior to those of the Empire under the Antonines. 
Italy alone had then 372 main routes, and 12,000 miles of paved thoroughfares; 
the Empire had 51,000 miles of paved highways and a pervasive network of sec- 
ondary roads. Highways ran over the Alps to Lyons, Bordeaux, Paris, Rheims, 
Rouen, and Boulogne; others to Vienna, Mainz, Augsburg, Cologne, Utrecht, 
and Leiden; and from Aquileia a road skirted the Adriatic to connect with the 
Via Egnatia to Thessalonica. Magnificent bridges replaced the ferries that had 
crept across a thousand impeding streams. At every mile on the consular roads 
stone markers gave the distance to the next to^vn; 4000 of these survive. At in- 
tervals seats were placed for tired travelers. At every tenth mile a statio offered a 
stopping place, where fresh horses could be hired; at every thirty miles was a 
?ncmsio—zn inn that was also a store, a saloon, and a brothel.^^ The main halting 
points were the civitates, cities, usually equipped with fair hotels, which were in 
some cases owned and managed by the municipal government.-- Most innkeepers 
robbed their guests whenever convenient, and other thieves made the highways 
unsafe at night despite a garrison of soldiers at each statio. “Itineraries” could be 
bought, showing routes, stations, and intermediate distances.-® Rich men, disdain- 
ing the inns, brought their equipage and slaves with them, and slept in their 
guarded carriages or in the homes of friends or officials on the way. 

Despite all difficulties, there was probably more traveling in Nero’s day than 
at any time before our birth. “Many people,” says Seneca, “make long voyages 
to see some remote sight” and Plutarch speaks of “globe-trotters who spend 
the best part of their lives in inns and on boats.” Educated Romans flocked to 
Greece and Egypt and Greek Asia, scratched their names on historic monuments,* 
sought healing waters or climates, ambled by art collections in the temples, 
studied under famous philosophers, rhetors, or physicians, and doubtless used 
Pausanias as their Baedeker.-® 

These “grand tours” usually involved a voyage on one or more of the merchant 
vessels that cut the Mediterranean with a hundred routes of trade, “Look at the 



ROME AT WORK 


CHAP. XV) 


325 


harbors and seas,” exclaimed Juvenal, “filled with great keels, more peopled than 
the land.” Rome’s rival ports, Puteoli, Portus, and Ostia, were alive with jabri 
navales building ships, stuppatores calking them, saburarii loading sand into them 
as ballast, sacrarii unloading grain in sacks, mensores weighing it, lenuncularii 
operating tenders between large ships and the shore, and urinatores diving for 
goods fallen into the sea. Of corn barges alone nventy-five were drawn up the 
Tiber every working day; if we add the transport of building stone, metals, oil, 
wine, and a thousand other articles, we picture a river teeming with commerce 
and noisy with loading and carrying machines, with dockmen, porters, steve- 
dores, traders, brokers, and clerks. 

Ships were driven with sails, aided by one or more banks of oars. They were 
larger, on the average, than before; Athenaeus describes a grain cargo vessel as 
420 feet long with a fifty-seven-foot beam;^® but this was highly exceptional. 
Some vessels had three decks; many took 250, several took a thousand, tons of 
freight. Josephus tells of one that carried 600 persons— passengers and crew;®® 
another carried an Egyptian obelisk as large as that in Central Park, New York, 
together with 200 sailors, 1 300 passengers, 93,000 bushels of wheat, and a load of 
linen, pepper, paper, and glass.®^ Nevertheless, voyages except along the coasts 
were still dangerous, as Saint Paul found; between November and March only a 
few vessels ventured across the open Mediterranean, and in midsummer east- 
ward voyages were made almost impossible by the etesian winds. Night sailing 
was now frequent, and every harbor of any pretense had a good lighthouse. 
Danger of piracy had almost disappeared from the Mediterranean. To discourage 
it, and starve rebellion, Augustus had stationed two main war fleets at Ravenna 
on the Adriatic and at Misenum on the Bay of Naples, besides minor squadrons 
at ten other points in the Empire. We may judge what Pliny called “the im- 
mense majesty of the Roman peace” by the fact that for two centuries we hardly 
hear of these fleets. 

Passenger schedules were largely indefinite, as sailings were determined by 
weather and commercial convenience. Rates were low— e.g., two drachmas 
($1.20) from Athens to Alexandria; but passengers brought their own food, 
and probably most of them slept on deck. Speed was as moderate as the fares, and 
varied with the winds, averaging six knots per hour; one might cross the Adriatic 
in a day, or, like Cicero, take three weeks from Patrae to Brundisium. A swift 
cruiser might make 230 knots in twenty-four hours.®® With favorable winds, six 
days carried one from Sicily to Alexandria or from Gades to Ostia, and four from 
Utica to Rome.®® The longest and most dangerous voyage was the six-month 
sail from Aden, in Arabia, to India, for monsoons forced vessels to hug the pirate- 
breeding coast all the way. At some time before a.d. 50 an Alexandrian Greek 
skipper, Hippalus, charted the periodicity of the monsoon winds and found that 
in certain seasons he could sail directly and safely across the Indian Ocean. The 
discovery was almost as important for that sea as the voyage of Columbus was 
for the Atlantic. Prom Egyptian ports on the Red Sea ships thereafter sailed to 
India in forty days. About a.d. 80 another Alexandrian captain, of unknown 



CAESAR AND CHRIST 


326 


(chap. XV 


name, wrote a Periplus of the Erythrem Sea as a handbook for merchants trading 
along the east African coast and with India. Meanwhile other mariners had 
developed routes through the Atlantic to Gaul, Britain, Germany, even to 
Scandinavia and Russia.®^ Never before in human memory had the seas borne 
so many vessels, products, and men. 


IV. THE ENGINEERS 

The ships and roads that carried goods, the bridges that bound the roads, the 
harbors and docks that received the ships, the aqueducts that brought clean water 
to Rome, the sewers that drained the rural marshes and the city’s waste, were the 
work of Roman, Greek, and Syrian engineers operating with armies of free 
labor, legionaries, and slaves. They raised or drew heavy loads or stones by 
pulleys on cranes or vertical beams, worked by windlasses on treadmills turned 
by animals or men.®® They banked the treacherous Tiber with walls set back in 
three stages, so that low water would not expose the muddy bed.* They dredged 
a multiple harbor at Ostia for Claudius, Nero, and Trajan, opened lesser havens 
at Marseilles, Puteoli, Misenum, Carthage, Brundisium, and Ravenna, and re- 
newed the greatest of all at Alexandria. They emptied the Fucine Lake and 
reclaimed its bed for cultivation by boring a tunnel through a mountain of rock. 
They lined the subsoil of Rome with sewers of concrete, brick, and tile which 
lasted for hundreds of years. They drained the swamps of Campania sufficiently 
to make it habitable, for many sumptuous palaces are indicated by the ruins 
there.®®! They executed the astonishing public works by which Caesar and the 
emperors mitigated unemployment and beautified Rome. 

The consular roads were among their simpler achievements. How did these 
highways compare with those of today? They were from sixteen to twenty-four 
feet wide, but near Rome part of this width was taken up with sidewalks {mar- 
gines) paved with rectangular stone slabs. They went straight to their goal in 
brave sacrifice of initial economy to permanent saving: they overleaped countless 
streams with costly bridges, crossed marshes with long, arched viaducts of brick 
and stone, climbed up and down steep hills with no use of cut and fill, and crept 
along mountainsides or high embankments secured by powerful retaining walls. 
Their pavement varied with locally available material. Usually the bottom layer 
(pavimentum) was a four- to six-inch bed of sand, or one inch of mortar. Upon 
this were imposed four strata of masonry: the statumen, a foot deep, consisting 
of stones bound with cement or clay; the nidens, ten inches of rammed concrete; 
the nucleus, twelve to eighteen inches of successively laid and rolled layers of 

• In 1870 the Italian government built embankments at a uniform width, with unpleasant 
results in the dry season. 

t Apparently the Volsci had drained the Pontine marshes before 600 b.c. Their Roman con- 
querors neglected the drainage canals, and the region again became swampy and malarial. 
Caesar planned its reclamation, and Augustus and Nero made some progress on the work; but 
the task was not accomplished till 1931. 



ROME AT WORK 


CHAP, XV) 


327 


concrete; and the summa crusta of silex or lava polygonal slabs, one to three feet 
in diameter, and eight to twelve inches thick. The upper surface of the slabs was 
smoothed, and the joints were so well fitted as to be hardly discernible. Occa- 
sionally the surface was of concrete; on less important roads it mig ht be of gravel; 
in Britain it was composed of flint stones laid in cement upon a gravel bed. The 
substructure was so deep that little attention was given to drainage. All in all, 
these were the most durable roads in history. Many of them are still in use; but 
their steep gradients, designed for pack mules and small vehicles, have compelled 
their abandonment by modem traffic.^^ 

The bridges that carried these roads were themselves high exemplars of wedded 
science and art. The Romans inherited from Ptolemaic Egypt the principles of 
hydraulic engineering; they employed them on an unprecedented scale, and the 
methods they transmitted remained unchanged till our time. They carried to its 
ancient limit the building of foundations and piers under water. They drove into 
the bed a double cylinder of piles, boarded each cylinder tightly, drained the 
water from between them, covered the exposed bottom with rock or lime, and 
on this basis raised the pier. Eight bridges crossed the Tiber at Rome: some 
sacredly ancient like the Pons Sublicius, on which no metal might be used; some 
so well built that Hke the Pons Fabricius they are functioning to this day. From 
these spans the Roman arch would go forth to bridge a hundred thousand streams 
in the white man’s world. 

Pliny thought that the aqueducts were Rome’s greatest achievement. “If one 
will note the abundance of water skillfully brought into the city for many public 
and private uses; if he will observe the lofty aqueducts required to maintain a 
proper elevation and grade, the mountains that had to be pierced, the depres- 
sions that had to be filled— he will conclude that the whole globe offers nothing 
more marvelous.’’ From distant springs fourteen aqueducts, totaling 1 300 miles, 
brought through tunnels and over majestic arches into Rome some 300,000,000 
gallons of water daily— as large a quantity per capita as in any modem city.^® 
These structures had their faults; leaks developed in the lead pipes and required 
frequent repair; by the end of the Western Eimpire all the aqueducts had gone 
out of use.* But when we consider that they fed ample water to homes, tene- 
ments, palaces, fountains, gardens, parks, and public baths where thousands 
bathed at once, and that enough remained to create artificial lakes for naval bat- 
tles, we begin to see that despite terror and corruption Rome was the best 
managed capital of antiquity and one of the best equipped cities of all time. 

At the head of the water department at the close of the first century was 
Sexms Julius Frontinus, whose books have made him the most famous of Roman 
engineers. He had already served as praetor, as governor of Britain, and several 
terms as consul. Like modem British statesmen he found time to write books as 
well as to govern states; he published a work on military science, of which the 

* One of them, the Aqua Virgo, now feeds the Fontana di Trevi; three others have been 
restored, and supply Rome with water today. 



CAESAR AND CHRIST 


328 


(chap. XV 


concluding portion, Stratagemata, remains,* and left us his personal account of 
the water system of Rome (De aqiiis urbis Komae'). He describes the corruption 
and malfeasance that he found in his department on taking office, and how 
palaces and brothels secretly tapped the water mains, and so greedily that once 
Rome ran out of water.**^ He describes his resolute reforms; tells in proud detail 
the sources, length, and function of each aqueduct; and concludes like Pliny: 
“Who will venture to compare with these mighty conduits the idle Pyramids, 
or the famous but useless works of the Greeks?” We sense here the frankly 
utilitarian Roman with little taste for beauty apart from use; we can understand 
him and admit that a city should have clean water before it has Parthenons. 
Through these artless books we perceive that even in the age of the despots there 
were Romans of the old type, men of ability and integrity, conscientious ad- 
ministrators who made the Empire prosper under the lords of misrule and 
opened a way for monarchy’s golden age. 


V. THE TRADERS 

The improvement of government and transport expanded Mediterranean 
trade to an unprecedented amplitude. At one end of the busy process of ex- 
change were peddlers hawking through the countryside everything from sulphur 
matches to costly imported silks; wandering auctioneers who served also as town 
criers and advertised lost goods and runaway slaves; daily markets and periodical 
fairs; shopkeepers haggling with customers, cheating with false or tipped scales, 
and keeping a tangential eye for the aedile’s inspectors of weights and measures. 
A little higher in the commercial hierarchy were shops that manufactured their 
own merchandise; these were the backbone of both industry and trade. At or 
near the ports were wholesalers {magnarii) who sold, to retailers or consumers, 
goods recently brought in from abroad; sometimes the owner or captain of a 
vessel would sell his cargo directly from the deck. 

For two centuries Italy enjoyed an “unfavorable” balance of trade— cheerfully 
bought more than she sold. She exported some Arretine pottery, some wine and 
oil, some metalware, glass, and perfumes from Campania; for the rest her prod- 
ucts were kept at home. Meanwhile the wholesalers had agents buying goods for 
Italy in all parts of the Empire, and foreign merchants had Greek or Syrian 
drummers touting and placing their goods in Italy. By this double process the 
delicacies of half the planet came to please the palate, clothe the flesh, and adorn 
the home of the Roman optimate. “Whoever wishes to see all the goods of the 
world,” said Aelius Aristides, “must either journey throughout the world or stay 
in Rome.” From Sicily came com, cattle, hides, wine, wool, fine woodwork, 
statuary, jewelry; from north Africa com and oil; from Cyrenaica silphium; 
from central Africa wild beasts for the arena; from Ethiopia and east Africa 
ivory, apes, tortoise shell, rare marbles, obsidian, spices, and Negro slaves; from 

• Book m opens with an instructive remark; “The invention of engines of war has long since 
leached its limit, and I see no funher hope for any improvement in the art.” ^0 



ROME AT WORK 


CHAP. XV) 


329 


west Africa oil, beasts, citron, wood, pearls, dyes, copper; from Spain fish, cattle, 
wool, gold, silver, lead, tin, copper, iron, cinnabar, wheat, linen, cork, horses, 
ham, bacon, and the finest olives and ohve oil; from Gaul clothing, wine, wheat, 
timber, vegetables, cattle, poultry, pottery, cheese; from Britain tin, lead, silver, 
Irides, wheat, cattle, slaves, oysters, dogs, pearls, and wooden goods. From Bel- 
gium flocks of geese were driven all the way to Italy to supply goose livers for 
aristocratic bellies. From Germany came amber, slaves, and furs; from the 
Danube wheat, cattle, iron, silver, and gold; from Greece and the Greek isles 
cheap silk, linen, wine, oil, honey, timber, marble, emeralds, drugs, artworks, 
perfumes, diamonds, and gold. From the Black Sea came corn, fish, furs, hides, 
slaves; from Asia Minor fine linen and woolen fabrics, parchment, wine, Smyrna 
and other figs, honey, cheese, oysters, carpets, oil, wood; from Syria wine, silk, 
linen, glass, oil, apples, pears, plums, figs, dates, pomegranates, nuts, nard, balsam, 
Tyrian purple, and the cedar of Lebanon; from Palmyra textiles, perfumes, drugs; 
from Arabia incense, gums, aloes, myrrh, laudanum, ginger, cinnamon, and pre- 
cious stones; from Egypt com, paper, linen, glass, jewelry, granite, basalt, ala- 
baster, and porphyry. Finished products of a thousand kinds came to Rome and 
the West from Alexandria, Sidon, Tyre, Antioch, Tarsus, Rhodes, Miletus, 
Ephesus, and the other great cities of the East, while the East received raw mate- 
rials and money from the West. 

In addition to all this there was a substantial import trade from outside the 
Empire. Erom Paithia and Persia came gems, rare essences, morocco leather, 
rugs, wild beasts, and eunuchs. From China— through Parthia, or India, or the 
Caucasus— came silk, raw or manufactured; the Romans thought it a vegetable 
product combed from trees and valued it at its weight in gold.^^ Much of this 
silk came to the island of Cos, where it was woven into dresses for the ladies of 
Rome and other cities; in a.d. 91 the relatively poor state of Messenia had to for- 
bid its women to wear transparent silk dresses at religious initiations; it was with 
such garments that Cleopatra touched the hearts of Caesar and Antony.'*® In 
return the Chinese imported from the Empire carpets, jewels, amber, metals, dyes, 
drugs, and glass. Chinese historians speak of an embassy coming by sea to the 
Emperor Huan-ti in 166 from the Emperor “An-Tun”— Marcus Aurelius An- 
toninus; more probably it was a band of merchants posing as ambassadors. Six- 
teen Roman coins, dating from Tiberius to Aurelius, have been found in Shansi. 
From India came pepper, spikenard, and other spices (the same that Columbus 
would seek), herbs, ivory, ebony, sandalwood, indigo, pearls, sardonyx, onyx, 
amethyst, carbuncle, diamonds, iron products, cosmetics, textiles, tigers, and ele- 
phants. We may judge the extent of this trade, and the Roman hunger for 
luxuries, by noting that Italy imported more from India than from any other 
country except Spain.'*® From one Egx^ptian port alone, Strabo avers, 120 ships 
sailed every year for India and Ceylon.*^ In exchange India took a modest quan- 
tity of wine, metals, and purple, and the rest— over 100,000,000 sesterces per year 
—in bullion or coin. A like amount went to Arabia and China, and probably to 
Spain.*® 



CAESAR AND CHRIST 


330 


(chap. XV 


This immense trade produced prosperity for two centuries, but its un- 
sound basis ruined Roman economy in the end. Italy made no attempt at 
equaling imports with exports; she appropriated the mines, and taxed the 
people, of half a hundred states to provide her with the money to meet her 
international balances. As the richer veins of the mines gave out, and the 
zest for exotic luxuries continued, Rome tried to stave off the breakdown of 
her import system by conquering new mineral regions like Dacia, and by de- 
basing her once incorruptible currency— turning ever less bullion into ever 
more coin. When the costs of administration and war mounted nearer to the 
profits of empire, Rome had to pay for goods with goods, and could not. 
Italy’s dependence upon imported food was her vital weakness; the moment 
she could not force other countries to send her food and soldiers she was 
doomed. Meanwhile the provinces recovered not only prosperity but eco- 
nomic initiative: Italian merchants, in this first century a.d., almost disap- 
peared from Eastern ports, while Syrian and Greek traders established them- 
selves at Delos and Puteoli and multiplied in Spain and Gaul. In the leisurely 
oscillation of history the East was preparing once more to dominate the 
West. 


VI. THE BANKERS 

How were production and commerce financed? First by the maintenance 
of a comparatively reliable currency internationally honored. All Roman 
coins had suffered gradual depreciation since the First Punic War, for the 
Treasury had found it convenient to pay off governmental war debts by 
permitting the inflation that naturally comes from the multiplication of 
money and the diminution of goods. The as, originally a pound of copper, 
had been reduced to two ounces in 241, one ounce in 202, half an ounce in 
87 B.C., and a quarter ounce in a.d. 60. During the final century of the Re- 
public the generals had issued their own coinage, usually in aurei, gold coins, 
normally worth one hundred sesterces. From this military coinage that of 
the emperors was descended, and the emperors followed Caesar’s custom of 
stamping their effigies on their issues as symbols of the state’s guarantee. The 
sesterce was now made from copper instead of silver and was revalued at 
four asses.* Nero lowered the silver content of the denarius to ninety per 
cent of its former quantity, Trajan to eighty-five per cent, Aurelius to 
seventy-five, Commodus to seventy, Septimius Severus to fifty. Nero re- 

• In referring to the period after Nero, Roman currency will be equated at two thirds its 
general value under the Republic: the as at two and a half, the sesterce at ten, the denarius at 
forty, cents, and the talent at $2400, in terms of United States currency of 1942. Since lesser 
variations will again be ignored, the reader will remember that all equivalents are very loosely 
approximate. 



ROME AT WORK 


CHAP. Xv) 


331 


duced the aureus from one fortieth of a pound of gold to one forty-fifth, 
Caracalla to one fiftieth. A general rise of prices accompanied these deprecia- 
tions, but income seems to have risen commensurately until Aurelius; per- 
haps this controlled inflation was a simple way of relieving debtors at the 
expense of creditors whose superior ability and opportunity, unchecked, 
would have concentrated wealth to the point of economic coagulation and 
political revolution. Despite these changes we must consider the Roman 
fiscal system one of the most successful and stable in history. For two cen- 
turies a single monetary standard was honored throughout the Empire; and 
with this stable medium investment and trade flourished as never before in 
the memory of men. 

Consequently bankers were everywhere. They served as money-changers, 
accepted checking accounts and interest-bearing deposits, issued travelers’ 
checks and bills of exchange, managed, bought, and sold realty, placed in- 
vestments and collected debts, and lent money to individuals and partner- 
ships. This banking system had come from Greece and the Greek East, and 
was mostly in the hands of Greeks and Syrians even in Italy and the West; 
in Gaul the words for Syrian and banker were synonyms.^® Interest rates, 
which had sunk to four per cent under the weight of Augustus’ Egyptian 
spoils, rose to six per cent after his death, and reached their legal maximum 
of twelve per cent by the age of Constantine. 

The famous “panic” of a.d. 3 3 illustrates the development and complex 
interdependence of banks and commerce in the Empire. Augustus had coined 
and spent money lavishly, on the theory that its increased circulation, low 
interest rates, and rising prices would stimulate business. They did; but as 
the process could not go on forever, a reaction set in as early as 10 B.c., 
when this flush minting ceased. Tiberius rebounded to the opposite theory— 
that the most economical economy is the best. Ele severely limited the 
governmental expenditures, sharply restricted new issues of currency, and 
hoarded 2,700,000,000 sesterces in the Treasury. The resulting dearth of 
circulating medium was made worse by the drain of money eastward in 
exchange for luxuries. Prices fell, interest rates rose, creditors foreclosed on 
debtors, debtors sued usurers, and moneylending almost ceased. The Senate 
tried to check the export of capital by requiring a high percentage of every 
senator’s fortune to be invested in Italian land; senators thereupon called in 
loans and foreclosed mortgages to raise cash, and the crisis rose. When the 
senator Publius Spinther notified the bank of Balbus and Ollius that he must 
withdraw 30,000,000 sesterces to comply with the new law, the firm an- 
nounced its bankruptcy. At the same time the failure of an Alexandrian firm, 
Seuthes and Son— due to their loss of three ships laden with costly spices— 
and the collapse of the great dyeing concern of Malchus at Tyre, led to 



332 


CAESAR AND CHRIST 


(chap. XV 

rumors that the Roman banking house of Maximus and Vibo would be 
broken by their extensive loans to these firms. When its depositors began 
a “run” on this bank it shut its doors, and later on that day a larger bank, of 
the Brothers Pettius, also suspended payment. Almost simultaneously came 
news that great banking establishments had failed in Lyons, Carthage, Cor- 
inth, and Byzantium. One after another the banks of Rome closed. Money 
could be borrowed only at rates far above the legal limit. Tiberius finally 
met the crisis by suspending the land-investment act and distributing i oo,- 
000,000 sesterces to the banks, to be lent without interest for three years on 
the security of realty. Private lenders were thereby constrained to lower 
their interest rates, money came out of hiding, and confidence slowly re- 
turned.®® 


VII. THE CLASSES 

Nearly everybody in Rome worshiped money with mad pursuit, and all 
but the bankers denounced it. “How Uttle you know the age you live in,” 
says a god in Ovid, “if you fancy that honey is sweeter than cash in hand! ” 
—and a century later Juvenal sarcastically hails the sanctissima divitiarum mod- 
estas, “the most holy majesty of wealth.” To the end of the Empire Roman 
law forbade the Senatorial class to invest in commerce or industry; and 
though they evaded the prohibition by letting their freedmen invest for them, 
they despised their proxies and upheld rule by birth as the sole alternative to 
rule by money, or myths, or the sword. After aU the revolutions and the deci- 
mations the old class divisions remained, with brand-new titles: members of 
the Senatorial and equestrian orders, magistrates and officials, were called 
honestiores, i.e., “men of honors” or offices; all the rest were hwniliores, 
“lowly,” or tenuiores, “weak.” A sense of honor often mingled with the 
proud gravity of the senator: he served in a succession of public posts with- 
out pay and at much personal expense; he administered important functions 
with a fair degree of competence and integrity; he provided for public 
games, helped his clients, freed some of his slaves, and shared a part of his 
fortune with the people through benefactions before or after his death. Be- 
cause of the obligations his position entailed, he was required to have a million 
sesterces to enter or remain in the Senatorial class. 

One senator, Gnaeus Lentulus, had 400,000,000 sesterces; but with this 
exception the greatest fortunes in Rome were those of businessmen who did 
not disdain to handle money or trade. While reducing the powers of the 
Senate, the emperors had favored the business class with high office, had 
protected industry, commerce, and finance, and had based upon equestrian 
support the security of the Principate against patrician intrigue. Membership 



ROME AT WORK 


CHAP. XV) 


333 


in this second order required 400,000 sesterces and specific nomination by 
the prince. Consequently many men of means belonged to the plebs. 

The plebs was now a motley receptacle of such innominate businessmen, 
freeborn workers, peasant proprietors, teachers, doctors, artists, and freed- 
men. The census defined the proletarii not by their occupation but by their 
offspring {proles ) ; an old Latin treatise called them “plebeians who offer 
nothing to the state but children.” Most of them found employment in 
the shops, factories, and commerce of the city at an average wage of a 
denarius (forty cents) a day; this rose in later centuries, but not faster than 
prices.®® Exploitation of the weak by the strong is as natural as eating and 
differs from it only in rapidity; we must expect to find it in every age and 
under every form of society and government; but rarely has it been so 
thorough and unsentimental as in ancient Rome. Once all men had been 
poor, and had not known their poverty; now penury rubbed elbows with 
wealth, and suffered from consciousness. Absolute destitution, however, was 
prevented by the dole, the occasional gifts of patrons to clients, and the 
lordly legacies of rich men like Balbus, who left twenty-five denarii to every 
citizen of Rome. Class divisions verged upon caste; yet an able man might 
free himself from slavery, make a fortune, and rise to high office in the 
service of the prince. The freedman’s son became a fully enfranchised free- 
man, and his grandson could become a senator; soon a freedman’s grandson, 
Pertinax, would be emperor. 

During the first century many high offices were filled by freedmen. They 
often had charge of the imperial finances in the provinces, the waterways of 
Rome, the mines and quarries and estates of the emperor, and the provision- 
ing of the army camps. Freedmen and slaves, nearly all of Greek or Syrian 
origin, managed the imperial palaces and held vital positions in the imperial 
cabinet. Petty industry and trade fell increasingly into the control of freed- 
men. Some of them became great capitalists or landowners; some accumu- 
lated the largest fortunes of their time. Their past had seldom given them 
moral standards or elevated interests; after their liberation money became 
the absorbing interest of their fives; they made it without scruple and spent 
it without taste. Petronius savagely excoriated them in Trimalchio, and 
Seneca, less bitter, smiled at the new rich who bought books in orna- 
mental sets but never read them.®^ Probably these satires were in part the 
jealous reactions of a caste that saw its ancient prerogatives of exploitation 
and luxury encroached upon, and could not forgive the men who were rising 
to share its perquisites and power. 

The success of the freedmen must have given some consoling hope to the 
class that did most of the manual work in Italy. Beloch estimated the slaves 
in Rome about 30 b.c. at some 400,000, or nearly half the population; in 



334 CAESAR AND CHRIST (CHAP. XV 

Italy at 1,500,000. If we may believe the table gossipers of Athenaeus, some 
Romans had 20,000 slaves.®® A proposal that slaves be required to wear a 
distinctive dress was voted down in the Senate lest they should realize their 
numerical strength.®® Galen reckoned the proportion of slaves to freemen at 
Pergamum about a.d. i 70 as one to three— i.e., twenty-five per cent; probably 
this proportion was not much different in other cities.®®'^ Human prices 
varied from 330 sesterces for a farm slave to the 700,000 ($105,000) paid 
by Marcus Scaurus for Daphnis the grammarian;®^ the average price was 
now 4000 sesterces (I400) . Eighty per cent of the employees in industry and 
retail trade were slaves, and most of the manual or clerical work in govern- 
ment was performed by servi pziMzi— “public slaves.” Domestic slaves were 
of every variety and condition: personal servants, handicraftsmen, tutors, 
cooks, hairdressers, musicians, copyists, hbrarians, artists, physicians, philos- 
ophers, eunuchs, pretty boys to sen'e at least as cupbearers, and cripples to 
provide amusement by their deformities; there was a special market at Rome 
where one might buy legless, armless, or three-eyed men, giants, dwarfs, or 
hermaphrodites.®® Household slaves were sometimes beaten, occasionally 
killed. Nero’s father killed his freedmen because they refused to drink as 
much as he wished.®® In an angry passage of his essay on anger Seneca de- 
scribes the “wooden racks and other instruments of torture, the dungeons and 
other jails, the fires built around imprisoned bodies in a pit, the hook dragging 
up the corpses, the many kinds of chains, the varied punishments, the tearing 
of limbs, the branding of foreheads” all these, apparently, entered into the 
life of the agricultural slave. Juvenal describes a lady as having slave after 
slave thrashed while her hair was being curled,®® and Ovid pictures another 
mistress jabbing hairpins into her maidservant’s arms;®^ but these tales have 
the earmarks of literary concoctions and must not be taken for history. 

We are in danger of exaggerating the cruelty of the past for the same 
reason that we magnify the crime and immorality of the present— because 
cruelty is interesting by its very rarity. By and large the lot of a domestic 
slave under the Empire was hghtened by a growing acceptance into the 
family, by mutual loyalty, by the pretty custom of owners waiting on the 
slaves at certain feasts, and by a security and permanence of employment 
exceptional in modern times. The joys of family fife were not denied" them, 
and their tombstones reveal as much tenderness as those of the free. One 
reads: “His parents have raised this monument to Eucopion, who hved six 
months and three days; the sweetest and most delightful babe, who, though 
he could not yet speak, was our greatest happiness.” ®® Other epitaphs show 
the most affectionate relations between masters and slaves: one owner de- 
clares that a dead servant was as dear to him as his son; a young noble mourns 
the death of his nurse; a nurse expresses her grief over a dead charge; a 



ROME AT WORK 


CHAP. XV) 


335 


learned lady raises an elegant memorial to her librarian.®® Statius writes a 
“Poem of Consolation to Flavius Ursus on the Death of a Favorite Slave.” 

It was not unusual for slaves to risk their lives to protect their masters; many 
voluntarily accompanied them into exile; several gave their lives for them. 
Some owners freed their slaves and married them; some treated them as 
friends; Seneca ate with his.®® The refinement of manners and sensitivity, 
the absence of a color line between master and slave, the tenets of the Stoic 
philosophy, and the classless faiths coming in from the East had a share in the 
mitigation of slavery; but the basic factors were the economic advantage of 
the owner, and the rising cost of slaves. Many slaves were respected as having 
high cultural abilities— stenographers, research aides, financial secretaries and 
managers, artists, physicians, grammarians, and philosophers. A slave could 
in many cases go into business for himself, giving a share of his earnings to 
his owner and keeping the rest as his peciilmm, a “httle money” peculiarly 
his own. With such earnings, or by faithful or exceptional service, or by 
personal attractiveness, a slave could usually achieve freedom in six years.®® 


The condition of the workers, and even of the slaves, was in some measure 
relieved by the collegia, or workers’ organizations. By this period we hear of 
these in great number and in proud specialization; there were separate guilds of 
trumpeters, horn players, clarion blowers, mba players, flutists, bagpipers, etc. 
Usually the collegia were modeled on the Italian municipality: they had a 
hierarchy of magistrates and one or more favorite deities whom they honored 
with a temple and an annual feast. Like the cities, they asked and found rich men 
and women to be their patrons, and to repay compliments by helping to finance 
their outings, their assembly halls, and their shrines. It would be an error to think 
of these associations as corresponding to the labor unions of our time; we can 
picture them better in terms of our fraternal orders, with their endless offices 
and titles of honor, their brotherly hilarity and jaunts, and their simple mutual 
aid. Rich men often encouraged the formation of these guilds and remembered 
them in their wills. In the collegium all the men were “brothers” and all the 
women “sisters,” and in some of them the slave could sit at table or in council 
with freeborn men. Every “member in good standing” was guaranteed a fancy 
funeral. 

In the last century of the Republic demagogues of all orders discovered that 
many collegia could be persuaded to vote almost to a man for any giving candi- 
date. In this way the associations became political instruments of patricians, 
plutocrats, and radicals; and their competitive corruption helped to destroy 
Roman democracy. Caesar outlawed them, but they revived; Augustus dissolved 
all but a few useful ones; Trajan again forbade them; Aurelius tolerated them; 
obviously they persisted throughout, within or beyond the law. In the end they 
became vehicles through which Christianity entered and pervaded the life of 
Rome. 



336 


CAESAR AND CHRIST 


(chap. XV 


VIII. THE ECONOMY AND THE STATE 

How far did the government, under the Empire, attempt to control the 
economic hfe? It tried, and largely failed, to restore peasant proprietorship; 
here the emperors were more enlightened than the Senate, which was dom- 
inated by the owners of the latifundia. Domitian sought to encourage the 
planting of cereals in Italy, but without success; in consequence Italy was 
always in fear of starvation. Vespasian forced the Senate to accept him as 
emperor by holding Egypt, then the chief source of Italy’s wheat; Septimius 
Severus would do the same by seizing north Africa. The state had to assure, 
and therefore supervise, the importation and distribution of grain; it offered 
privileges to merchants bringing grain to Italy; Claudius guaranteed them 
against loss, and Nero freed their ships from the property tax. The delay or 
wrecking of the grain fleet was now the only cause that could stir the Roman 
populace to revolt. ^ 

The Roman economy was a system of laissez fcnre tempered with state 
ownership of natural resources— mines, quarries, fisheries, salt deposits, and 
considerable tracts of cultivated land.®® The legions made the bricks and 
tiles needed for their buildings, and were often used on public construction, 
especially in the colonies. The manufacture of arms and machines of war was 
probably reserved for state arsenals; and there may have been, in the first 
century, such govemmentally owned factories as we hear of in the third.®® 
Public works were normally let out to private contractors under such strict 
state supervision that they were usually well done, and with a minimum of 
corruption.^® About a.d. 8o such enterprises were increasingly carried out by 
the emperor’s freedmen with the labor of governmental slaves. At all times, 
apparently, the mitigation of unemployment was one purpose of these state 
undertakings.^^ 

Trade was moderately burdened with a one per cent sales tax, light custom 
dues, and occasional tolls for the passage of goods over bridges and through 
towns. The aediles supervised retail trade under an excellent system of regula- 
tions, but, if we may believe an irate character in Petronius, they were no 
better than similar officials in other times; “they graft with the bakers and 
other such scoundrels . . . and the jaws of the capitalists are always 
open.” Finance was subject to governmental manipulation of the cur- 
rency, and to the competition of the Treasury, which appears to have been 
the largest banker in the Empire; it lent money at interest to farmers on the 
pledge of their crops, and to city dwellers on the security of their furni- 
ture.'® Commerce was aided by “wars, which opened new resources and 
markets and won control of trade routes; so the expedition of Gallus into 












Fig. 14— Tt:-o Rovian Mosaics 
Top, .Museo Xazionale, Naples. Bottom, Capitoline Museum, Rome 




Fig. i^—The Gemma Augusta 
Vienna Museum 




Fig. ij—The Portland Vase 
British Museum 







Fig. ig— Frieze of Telhis from the Altar of Peace 
Uffizi Gallery, Florence 



ROME AT WORK 


CHAP. XV) 


337 


Arabia secured the passage to India against the competition of Arabs and 
Parthians. Pliny complained that campaigns had been undertaken that 
Roman ladies and dandies might have a wider choice of perfumes.'^* 

We must not exaggerate the wealth of ancient Rome. The total annual 
revenue of the state under Vespasian was at most 1,500,000,000 sesterces 
( $ 1 50,000,000) —less than a fifth of the budget of New Y ork City today. The 
means of amassing great fortunes by large-scale production were unknown 
or ignored, and had not developed the immense and taxable industry and 
commerce of the modem world. The Roman government spent little on 
the navy, and nothing on servicing a national debt; it lived on its income, 
not on its debts. Industry being largely domestic, its products passed to the 
consumer with less intervening trade and taxation than today. Men pro- 
duced for their own localities rather than for the general market. They did 
more for themselves, less for unseen others, than we do. They used their 
bodies more, worked longer hours less intensely, and did not miss a thousand 
luxuries that lay outside their dreams. They could not begin to rival the 
wealth of even our less affluent years; but they enjoyed a degree of pros- 
perity such as the Mediterranean nations had not known before and, as a 
whole, have never known again. It was the material zenith of the ancient 
world. 



CHAPTER XVI 


Rome and Its Art 


30 B.C.-A.D. 96 


1. THE DEBT TO GREECE 

T he Romans were not of themselves an artistic people. Before Augustus 
they were warriors, after him they were rulers; they counted the 
estabhshment of order and security through government a greater good and 
nobler task than the creation or enjoyment of beauty. They paid great sums 
for the works of dead masters, but looked down upon living artists as 
menials. “While we adore images,” said the kindly Seneca, “we despise those 
who fashion them.” ^ Only law and politics, and, of manual arts, only agri- 
culture (by proxy), seemed honorable ways of life. Barring the architects, 
most artists in Rome were Greek slaves or freedmen or hirelings; nearly all 
worked with their hands and were classed as artisans; Latin authors seldom 
thought of recording their hves or their names. Hence Roman art is almost 
wholly anonymous; no vivid personalities humanize its history as Myron, 
Pheidias, Praxiteles, and Protogenes light up the aesthetic story of Greece. 
Here the historian is constrained to speak of things, not men, to catalogue 
coins, vases, statues, reliefs, pictures, and buildings in the desperate hope that 
their accumulation may laboriously convey the crowded majesty of Rome. 
The products of art appeal to the soul through eye or ear or hand rather than 
through the intellect; their beauty fades when it is diluted into ideas and 
words. The universe of thought is only one of many worlds; each sense 
has its own; each art has therefore its characteristic medium, which cannot 
be translated into speech. Even an artist writes about art in vain. 

A special misfortune clouds Roman art: we come to it from Greek art, 
which seems at first*its model and master. As the art of India disturbs us by 
strange shapes, so that of Rome chills us by the monotonous repetition of 
familiar forms. We have seen long since these Doric, Ionic, Corinthian col- 
umns and capitals, these smooth idealized reliefs, these busts of poets, rulers, 
and gods; even the astonishing frescoes of Pompeii, we are told, were copies 
of Greek originals; only the “Composite” order is indigenously Roman, and 
it offends our notions of classic unity, simplicity, and restraint. Certainly the 
art of the Augustan Age in Rome was overwhelmingly Greek Through 

338 



ROME AND ITS ART 


CHAP. XVl) 


339 


Sicily and Greek Italy, through Campania and Etruria, finally through 
Greece, Alexandria, and the Hellenic East, the aesthetic forms, methods, and 
ideals of Hellas passed into Roman art. When Rome became mistress of the 
Mediterranean, Greek artists poured into the new center of wealth and 
patronage and made countless copies of Greek masterpieces for Roman 
temples, palaces, and squares. Every conqueror brought home examples, 
every magnate scoured the cities for the surviving treasures, of Greek work- 
manship. Gradually Italy became a museum of bought or stolen paintings 
and statuary that set the tone of Roman art for a century. Artistically Rome 
was swallowed up in the Hellenistic world. 

All this is half the truth. In one aspect, as we shall see, the history of Roman 
art is a conflict between the architrave and the arch; in another it is the 
struggle of native Itahan realism to recover from the invasion of the penin- 
sula by a Greek art that had pictured gods rather than men, the type or 
Platonic idea rather than the earthly individual, and had sought a noble per- 
fection of form rather than truth of perception and utterance. That virile 
indigenous art which had helped to carve the figures on Etruscan tombs 
hibernated between the Greek conquest and Nero’s philhellenic ecstasy; but 
at last it broke the Hellenistic mold, and revolutionized classic art with real- 
istic sculpture, impressionistic painting, and an architecture of arch and 
vault. Through these, as well as by her borrowed beauty, Rome became for 
eighteen centuries the art capital of the Western world. 


II. THE toilers’ ROME 

The ancient traveler bent on making a tour of Flavian Rome, and coming 
northward up the Tiber from Ostia, would first of all have noted the swift- 
ness of the muddy current, carrying along the soil of hills and valleys to the 
sea. In this simple fact lay the leisurely tragedy of erosion, the difficulty of 
two-way conunerce on the river, the periodical silting of the Tiber’s mouth, 
and the floods that almost every spring inundated the lower levels of Rome, 
confined the residents to upper stories reached by boats, and often destroyed 
the com stored in granaries on the wharves. When the waters fell they 
carried houses to ruin, and men and animals to death.® 

As he neared the city * the visitor’s eye would be caught by the Emporium, 
which ran for a thousand feet along the river’s eastern edge, and was noisy 
with workers, warehouses, ffiarkets, and moving goods. Beyond it rose that 
Aventine hill on which the angry plebs had staged its “sit-down strikes” of 

* Cf. the map of Rome on the flyleaf of tills volume. 




CAESAR AND CHRIST 


340 


(chap. XVI 


494 and 449 b . c . On the left bank at this point were the gardens that Caesar 
had bequeathed to the people, and behind them the Janiculum. Near the 
eastern shore at the beautiful Pons Aemilius lay the Forum Boarium or 
Cattle Market, with its (still standing) temples to Fortune and Mater Ma- 
tuta, the Goddess of the Dawn. Farther north on the right loomed the Palatine 
and Capitoline hills, thick with palaces and temples. On the left bank were 
Agrippa’s gardens, and beyond them the Vatican hill. North of the city’s 
center, off the eastern shore, stretched the spacious lawns and decorative 
buildings of the Campus Martins, or Field of Mars; here were the theaters of 
Balbus and Pompey, the Circus of Flaminius, the Baths of Agrippa, and 
Domitian’s stadium; here the legions practiced, athletes competed, chariots 
raced, the people played ball,® and the Assembly gathered, under the em- 
perors, to go through the motions of democracy’s ghost. 

Disembarking at the city’s northern limits, the visitor saw some remains of 
the wall ascribed to Servius Tullius. Rome had probably rebuilt it after the 
Gallic raid of 390 b.c., but the power of Roman arms, and the apparent 
security of the capital, allowed the rampart to lapse into ruins; not till 
Aurelian (a.d. 270) would another wall rise, a symbol of security gone. 
Gates had been cut in the wall, usually as single or triple archways, to permit 
the passage of the great roads from which they took their names. Touring 
the boundary of the city east and then south, the visitor would see the 
luxuriant gardens of Sallust, the dusty camp of the Praetorians, the arches of 
the Marcian, Appian, and Claudian aqueducts, and on his right, in turn, the 
Pincian, Quirinal, Viminal, Esquiline, and Caelian hills. Leaving the walls 
and walking northwest on the Appian Way, he would pass through the 
Porta Capena along the southern slope of the Palatine to the Nova Via 
(“New Street”) , and then northward through a maze of arches and buildings 
to stand in the ancient Forum, the head and heart of Rome. 

Originally it had been a market place, some 600 by 200 feet; now (a.d. 96) 
the sellers had retired into the rjear-by streets or into other forums, but in 
the adjoining basilicas men sold shares in the publicans’ corporations, made 
contracts with the government, defended themselves in the courts, or con- 
sulted lawyers on how to escape the law. Around the Forum had been built, 
as around New York’s Wall Street, some modest temples to the gods, and 
some larger ones to Mammon. A population of statues adorned it, and the col- 
onnades of great edifices provided the shade that could hardly come from a 
few ancient trees. From' 145 b.c. till Caesar it had been the meeting place of 
the assemblies. At either end stood a speaker’s platform, named rostrum be- 
cause an earlier stand had been decorated with the rostra or prows of ships 
captured from Antium in 338 b.c. At the western end was the Millenarium 
Aureum, or Golden Milestone, a column of gilded bronze set up by Augustus 



ROME AND ITS ART 


341 


CHAP. XVl) 

to mark the junction and origin of several consular roads; on it were inscribed 
the major towns reached and their distances from Rome. Along the south- 
west side ran the Sacra Via, or Sacred Way, which led up to the temples of 
Jupiter and Saturn on the Capitoline hill. North of this Forum the visitor 
would find a larger one, the Forum lulium, built by Caesar to relieve the older 
area; near by were additional forums laid out for Augustus and Vespasian; 
and soon Trajan would clear and adorn the greatest of them all. 

Even in so hasty a circuit the ancient tourist would have felt the crowded 
diversity of the city’s population and the tortuous inadequacy of its hap- 
hazard streets. A few of these were from sixteen to nineteen feet wide; most 
of them were meandering alleys in the Oriental style. Juvenal complained 
that carts rumbling over the uneven pavements at night made sleep im- 
possible, while the jostling crowds made daytime walking a form of war. 
“Hurry as we may, we are blocked by a surging host in front, and by a 
dense mass of people pressing upon us from behind. One digs an elbow into 
me, another a sedan pole; one bangs a beam, another a wine cask, against my 
head. My legs are beplastered with mud; huge feet trample upon me from 
every side; a soldier plants his hobnail boot squarely upon my toes.” * The 
main thoroughfares were paved with large pentagonal blocks of lava stone, 
sometimes so firmly set in concrete that a few have remained in place till 
our time. There was no street lighting; whoever ventured out after dark 
carried a lantern, or followed a torchbearing slave; in either case he ran the 
gauntlet of many thieves. Doors were fastened with locks and keys; windows 
were bolted at night, and those on the ground floor were guarded— as now— 
by iron bars. To these perils Juvenal adds the objects, solid or hquid, thrown 
from upper-floor windows. All in all, he thought, only a fool would go out 
to dinner without making his will.® 

Since there were no public vehicles to transport workers from their homes 
to their toil, most of the plebs lived in brick tenements near the heart of the 
town, or in rooms behind or above their shops. A tenement usually covered 
an entire square, and was therefore called an insula, or island. Many of these 
buildings were six or seven stories high, and so flimsily built that several 
collapsed, lolling hundreds of occupants. Augustus limited the frontal height 
of buildings to seventy Roman feet, but apparently the law permitted greater 
elevations in the rear, for Martial tells of “a poor devil whose attic is 200 
steps up.” ® Many tenements had shops on the ground floor; some had 
balconies on the second; a few were connected at the top with tenements 
across the street by arched passages containing additional rooms— precarious 
penthouses for particular plebeians. Such insulae almost filled the Nova Via, 
the Clivus Victoriae (Victory HillJ'on the Palatine, and the Subura- a noisy 



CAESAR AND CHRIST 


342 


(chap. XVI 


brothel-ridden district between the Viminal and the Esquiline. In them 
dwelt the longshoremen of the Emporium, the butchers of the Macellum, 
the fishmongers of the Forum Piscatorium, the cattlemen of the Forum 
Boarium, the vegetable vendors of the Forum Holitorium, and the workers 
in Rome’s factories, clerkships, and trades. The slums of Rome lapped the 
edges of the Forum. 

The streets off the Forum were lined with shops and resounded with labor 
and bargaining. Fruit sellers, booksellers, perfumers, milliners, dyers, florists, 
cutlers, locksmiths, apothecaries, and other caterers to the needs, foibles, 
and vanities of mankind blocked the thoroughfares with their projecting 
booths. Barbers plied their trade in the open air, where all could hear; wine 
taverns were so numerous that Rome seemed to Martial one vast saloon.'^ 
Each trade tended to center in some quarter or street and often gave the 
locality a name; so the sandalmakers were gathered in the Vicus Sandalarius, 
the hamessmakers in the Vicus Lorarius, the glassblowers in the Vicus 
\fitrarius, the jewelers in the Vicus Margaritarius. 

In such shops the artists of Italy did their work— all but the greatest of 
them, who drew high fees and lived in peripatetic luxury. Lucullus gave 
Arcesilaus a million sesterces to make a statue of the goddess Pelicitas, and 
Zenodorus received 400,000 for a colossus of Mercury.® Architects and 
sculptors were ranked with physicians, teachers, and chemists as pursuing 
artes liberales, arts of freemen; but the men who did most of the artwork 
of Rome were or had been slaves. Some owners had their bondsmen trained 
in carving, painting, and like skills, and sold their products in Italy and 
abroad. In such shops labor was sharply divided: some specialized in votive 
figures, others in decorative cornices; some cut glass eyes for statues; dif- 
ferent painters made arabesques or flowers or landscapes or animals or men, 
and worked in turn on the same picture. Several artists were expert forgers, 
producing antiques of any marketable age.® The Romans of the last cenmry 
B.c. were easily deceived in these matters, for, like most noivuemx riches, 
they tended to value objects according to cost and rarity rather than by 
beauty and use. During the Empire, when it was no longer a distinction to 
be wealthy, taste improved, and a sincere love of excellence brought to many 
thousands of families a refinement of utensils and ornaments such as only 
a very few had known in Egypt, Alesopotamia, and Greece. Art was to 
antiquity what industry is to modernity. Men could not then enjoy the 
lavish abundance of useful products now poured forth by our machines; 
but they could, if they cared enough, gradually surround themselves with 
objects whose zealously finished form gave to all who lived with them the 
subtle and quiet happiness of beautiful things. 



CHAP. XVl) 


ROME AND ITS ART 


343 


m. THE HOMES OF THE GREAT 

The visitor seeking to study the dwellings of the middle class would have 
found them away from the city’s center on the main diverging roads. Their 
brick-and-stucco exteriors were still built, as before, in the plain and solid style 
dictated by insecurity and heat; the Roman bourgeois wasted no art on passers-by. 
Few houses rose to more than two stories. Cellars were rare; roofs sparkled with 
red tiles; windows were fitted with shutters or, occasionally, panes of glass. The 
entrance was usually a double door, each half turning on metal pivots. Floors 
were of concrete or tile, often of mosaic squares; there were no carpets. Around 
the central atrium were grouped the main rooms of the house: this is the archi- 
tectural origin of the cloister and the college quadrangle. In the richer houses one 
or more rooms would be used for bathing, usually in tubs much like our own. 
Plumbing was carried by the Romans to an excellence unmatched before the 
twentieth century. Lead pipes brought water from the aqueducts and mains into 
most tenements and homes; fittings and stopcocks were of bronze, and some were 
molded into highly ornamental designs.^® Leaders and gutters of lead carried 
rain from the roof. Most rooms were heated, if at all, by portable charcoal 
braziers; a few homes, many villas and palaces, and the public baths enjoyed 
central heating from wood- or charcoal-burning furnaces supplying hot air to 
various rooms through tile pipes or passages in floors and walls.* 

In the early Empire a Flellenistic addition was made to the rich Roman’s house. 
To provide a privacy not always possible in the atrium, he built behind it a 
peristyliiim, a court open to the sky, planted with flowers and shrubs, adorned 
by statues, surrounded by a portico, and centering about a fountain or a bathing 
pool. Around this court he raised a new set of rooms; a triclmium or dining room, 
an oeciis (“house”) for the women, a pinacotheca for his art collection, a biblio- 
theca for his books, and a lararhmi for his household gods; there might also be 
extra bedrooms, and little alcoves called everfrae— “sitting-out” nooks. Less ex- 
pensive homes substituted a garden for the peristyliiim; and if even that could 
find no ground, the Romans placed flower boxes in the windows or grew flowers 
and shrubs on the roof. Some large roofs, says Seneca, had grape arbors, fruit 
trees, and shade trees planted in boxes of soil;^^ not a few had solaria for baking 
bellies in the sun. 

Many Romans wearied of the roar and rush of Rome and fled to the peace and 
boredom of the countryside. Rich and poor alike developed a feeling for nature 
beyond anything discernible in ancient Greece, Juvenal thought a man fpolish 
to live in the capital wTen, for the annual rental of a dark garret in Rome, he 
might buy a pretty house in some quiet Italian town and surround it wth “a 
trim garden fit to feast a hundred Pythagoreans.” The well to do moved out of 

* Vitruvius describes these hypocaiista as introduced about loo b.c.i^ By a.d. io they were 
fairly common, particularly in the north, and even in Britain, which is slowly recapturincr 
the idea. 




344 CAESAR AND CHRIST (cHAP. XVI 

Rome in early spring to villas in the foothills of the Apennines or on the shores of 
lakes or the sea. The younger Pliny has left us a pleasant description of his 
country house at Laurentum on the coast of Latium. He calls it “large enough 
for my convenience, without being expensive to maintain”; but as he goes on we 
suspect a pose in his modesty. He describes “a small porch sheltered by glazed 
windows and overhanging eaves ... a handsome dining room gently washed by 
the edge of the last breakers,” and so bright with spacious windows as to give 
“a view in three directions, as if of three different seas”; an atrium “whence the 
prospect ends in woods and mountains”; two drawing rooms; a “semicircular 
library whose windows receive the sun all day long”; a bedchamber, and several 
rooms for servants. In an opposite wing were “an elegant parlor,” a second dining 
room, and four small rooms; a bathroom suite consisting of “a pleasant undressing 
room,” a frigidarium or cold bath, a tepidarium with three pools heated to dif- 
ferent degrees, and a calidarium or hot bath; all centrally heated by hot-air pipes. 
Outside were a swimming pool, a ball court, a storehouse, a variegated garden, 
a private study and banquet hall, and an observation tower wdth two apartments 
and a dining room. “Tell me now,” Pliny concludes, “have I not just cause to 
bestow my time and affection upon this agreeable retreat? ” 

If a senator could have such a villa on the sea, and another on Como, we 
may begin to imagine the sprawling luxury of Tiberius’ estate at Capri, or 
Domitian’s at Alba Longa— not to speak of the one that Hadrian would soon 
build at Tibur. To match this cubicular extravagance the visitor would have 
to find entry to the palaces of millionaires and emperors on the Palatine. In 
domestic architecture the Romans did not care to imitate classic Greece, 
where homes were modest and only temples were great; they modeled 
their palaces upon the residences of the half-Orientalized Hellenistic kings; 
Ptolemaic styles came to Rome with Cleopatra’s gold, and royal architecture 
accompanied monarchical politics. The palace of Augustus, receiving the 
name from the hill it stood on, spread with extensions as the administrative 
functions of the imperial household increased. Most of his successors built 
additional palaces for themselves and their staffs: Tiberius his doirms Tiberi- 
ana, Caligula his donms Gaicma, Nero his dovms aurea. 

This Golden House became the passing wonder of Rome. Its buildings 
alone covered 900,000 square feet, and yet were but a small part of a mile- 
square villa that overflowed from the Palatine upon the neighboring hills . 
A great park surrounded the palace, with gardens, meadows, fish ponds, 
game preserves, aviaries, vineyards, streams, fountains, waterfalls, lakes, im- 
perial galleys, pleasure houses, summerhouses, flower houses, and porticoes 
3000 feet long. An angry wit scratched a representative comment on a wall: 
“Rome has become the habitation of one man. It is time, citizens, to emigrate 
to Veii— unless, indeed, Veii itself is to be comprised in Nero’s home.” 



ROME AND ITS ART 


CHAP. XVl) 


345 


The interior of the palace gleamed with marble, bronze, and gold, with the 
gilded metal of countless Corinthian capitals, and with thousands of statues, 
reliefs, paintings, and objects of art bought or looted from the classic world; 
among them was the Laocodn. Some of the walls were inlaid with mother- 
of-pearl and various costly gems. The ceiling of the banquet hall was 
covered with ivory flowers from which, at a nod of the emperor, a perfumed 
spray would fall upon his guests. The dining room had a spherical ceiling 
of ivory painted to represent the sky and the stars, which was kept in 
constant slow rotation by hidden machines. A suite of rooms provided hot 
baths, cold baths, tepid baths, salt-water baths, and sulphur baths. When the 
Roman architects Celer and Severus had nearly finished the immense struc- 
ture and Nero moved in, he remarked, “At last I am lodged.” A generation 
later this Roman Versailles, too costly and dangerous to maintain amid sur- 
rounding poverty, had fallen into neglect. Over its ruins Vespasian built the 
Colosseum, Titus and Trajan their enormous public baths. 

Domitian shared Nero’s architectural madness. For him Rabirius raised 
the domus Flavia, not quite as elephantine as Nero’s museum, but yielding 
little to it in gaudy splendor and decoration. One wing alone contained a 
vast basilica, probably the court where the Emperor tried cases of final 
appeal; the same wing enclosed a peristyUuvi covering 30,000 square feet. 
Adjoining this was a banquet hall, whose pavement of red porphyry and 
green serpentine survives; gone are the delicate marble screens and beauti- 
fully columned windows through which the diners might watch the waters 
splashing over the marble basins of the nymphaea or fountains outside. It 
should be added that Domitian used this building only for receptions and 
administration; usually he lived in the more modest quarters of Augustus’ 
palace. Doubtless these royal edifices were part of the facade of empire, 
designed to impress natives, visitors, and embassies, while the emperors them- 
selves, perhaps excepting Caligula and Nero, fled from the constraining 
formality of these ceremonial rooms to the ease and intimacy of their family 
quarters, and enjoyed, as Antoninus Pius would put it, “the pleasure of 
being men.” 


IV. THE ARTS OF DECOR.\TION 

In these palaces, and in the homes of the rich, a hundred arts were employed 
to make everything if not beautiful, at least expensive. The floors were often of 
polychrome marble, or mosaics whose patient combination of tiny varicolored 
cubes (tesse^-ae) resulted in paintings of remarkable realism and permanence. 
Furniture was less abundant and comfortable than among ourselves, but of gen- 
erally superior design and workmanship. Tables, chairs, benches, couches, beds. 



CAESAR AND CHRIST 


346 


(chap. x\t 


lamps, and utensils were made of lasting materials, and lavishly adorned; the 
best wood, ivory, marble, bronze, silver, and gold were carefully turned and 
finished, decorated with plant or animal forms, or inlaid with ivory, tortoise 
shell, chased bronze, or precious stones. Tables were sometimes cut from costly 
cypress or citrus woods; some were of gold or silver; many were of marble or 
bronze. Chairs were of every sort from folding stool to throne, but less calculated 
than ours to deform the spine. Beds were of wood or metal, with slim but sturdy 
legs often ending in an animal’s head or foot; a bronze web, instead of a spring, 
supported a mattress filled with straw or wool. Bronze tripods of elegant form 
took the place of our end tables; and here and there were cabinets with pigeon- 
holes for rolled books. Bronze braziers warmed the rooms, and bronze lamps 
lighted them. Mirrors too were of bronze, highly polished, embossed or engraved 
with floral or mythical designs; some were made horizontally or vertically convex 
or concave to distort reflections into a humorous slenderness or rotundity 

The factories of Campania, working with the rich output of Spanish mines, 
produced silverware on a large scale for a wide market; silver services were now 
common in the middle and upper classes. In 1895 an excavator found in the 
cistern of a villa at Boscoreale a remarkable collection of silver, apparently de- 
posited there by its owner before his unsuccessful flight from the embers of 
Vesuvius in a.d. 79. One of the sixteen cups bears an almost perfect representa- 
tion of simple foliage; two depict skeletons in high relief; another pictures Au- 
gustus enthroned between Venus and Mars, the rival deities of mankind; the 
sliest shows Zeno the Stoic pointing with scorn at Epicurus, who is helping him- 
self to a huge piece of cake, while a pig, with uplifted foreleg, politely asks for a 
share. 

The coins and gems of the early Empire prove the progress of the engraver’s 
art. Those of Augustus show the same good taste, sometimes the same designs, as 
the Altar of Peace. Precious stones imported from Africa, Arabia, and India were 
cut and set into rings, brooches, necklaces, bracelets, cups, even into walls. A ring 
on at least one finger was a social necessity; a few fops wore rings on all fingers 
but one. The Roman sealed his signature with his ring and therefore liked to have 
the seal individually designed. Some of the best-paid artists in Rome were gem 
cutters, like the Dioscurides who made Augustus’ seal. In cutting cameos the 
Golden Age reached a level never surpassed; the gemma Augusta in Vienna is 
among the finest in existence. To collect gems and cameos became a hobby of 
rich Romans— Pompey, Caesar, Augustus; by inheritance the imperial gem cabinet 
grew till Marcus Aurelius sold it to help pay for his war against the Marco- 
manni. From the official guardian of the imperial seals and gems England derived 
her Keeper of the Great, or Privy, Seal. 

Meanwhile the potters of Capua, Puteoli, Cumae, and Arretium were fillin g 
Italian homes with every variety of ceramic art. Arretium had mixing vats with 
a capacity of 10,000 gallons. Its red-glazed tableware was for a century the most 
widely spread product of Italy; specimens of it have been found almost every- 
where. Iron stamps, hollowed out in relief, were used to impress upon each vase. 



ROME AND ITS ART 


CHAP. XAT) 


347 


lamp, or tile the name of the maker, sometimes also the names of the year’s 
consuls, as a date. To this degree the ancients knew the art of printing; they left 
it undeveloped because slave copyists were cheap.^® 


From pottery the workers of Cumae, Litemum, and Aquileia turned to 
the production of artistic glass.* The Portland Vase is a famous example of 
its kind;t finer still is the “Blue Glass Vase” found at Pompeii, depicting 
in lively and graceful action a vintage feast of Bacchus.^® In the reign of 
Tiberius, say Pliny and Strabo,*® the art of glass blowing was brought from 
Sidon or Alexandria to Rome, and soon produced polychrome phials, cups, 
bowls, and other forms of such delicate beauty that they became for a 
time the favorite prey of art collectors and milhonaires. In Nero’s reign 6000 
sesterces were paid for two small cups of blown glass now known as 
7mllefiori, or “thousand flowers,” produced by fusing together differently 
colored glass rods. Even more prized were the “iMurrhine” vases imported 
from Asia and Africa. They were made by placing white and purple glass 
filaments side by side to form a desired pattern, and then firing them; or 
pieces of colored glass were embedded in a transparent white body. Pompey 
brought some to Rome after his victory over Alithridates; Augustus, though 
he melted down Cleopatra’s gold plate, kept for himself her goblet of 
Alurrhine glass. Nero paid a million sesterces for one such cup; Petronius, 
dying, broke another lest it should fall into Nero’s hands. All in all, the 
Romans have had no superior in making glass; and there are few art collec- 
tions in the world more precious than those of Roman glass in the British 
Museum and the Metropolitan Aluseum of Art. 


V. SCULPTURE 

Pottery passed into sculpture through baked clay— terra-cotta reliefs and 
statuettes, toys, imitations of fruit, grapes, fish— at last full-sized statues. 
Glazed terra cotta— majolica— abounded in the ruins of Pompeii. Temple 
pediments and eaves were adorned with terra-cotta palmettes, acroteria, 

* The Syrians and Egyptians, some 200 years before Christ, had discovered that the fusion 
of sand with an alkaline substance at a high temperature produced a semitransparent liquid of 
greenish color (due to the iron oxide in the sand)-, that the addition of manganese and lead 
oxide rendered the product colorless and fuUy transparent; and that different shades could be 
induced by different chemicals— blue, for example, by cobalt. The fluid paste was shaped by 
hand or blown into molds; or the paste was allowed to harden, and then cut on a wheel. 

t This vase of superimposed layers of glass was probably of Greek origin. It was found near 
Rome in 1770, was bought by the Duke of Portland, and was lent to the British Museum in 
1810. In 1845 a maniac smashed it into 250 pieces, but it was so successfully restored that when 
the then Duke offered it for sale in 1929 he received 3 bid of $152,000. The bid was rejected as 
too low.i8» 




CAESAR AND CHRIST 


348 


(chap. XVI 


gargoyles, and reliefs. The Greeks laughed at these ornaments, and under 
the Empire they went out of fashion; Augustus was no friend of clay. 

It was probably through his Attic taste that relief and sculpture attained 
in Rome an excellence comparable with the best Hellenistic work. For a 
generation the artists of- Rome carved fountains, tombstones, arches, and 
altars with a refinement of feeling, a precision of execution, a quiet dignity 
of form, a measure of modeling and perspective, that rank Roman reliefs 
among the masterpieces of the world’s art. In 13 b.c. the Senate celebrated 
the return of Augustus from the pacification of Spain and Gaul by decreeing 
that an Ara Pads Augtistae, or “Altar of the Augustan Peace,” should be 
erected in the Field of Mars. This is the noblest of all the sculptural remains 
of Rome. Perhaps the monument owed its form to the altar at Pergamum, 
and its processional motif to the Parthenon frieze; the altar was raised on 
a platform in an enclosure whose surrounding walls were partly carved in 
marble relief; the extant pieces are slabs from these walls.* One slab repre- 
sents Tellus— Mother Earth— with two children in her arms, com and flowers 
growing beside her, and animals lying contentedly at her feet. These were 
the leading ideas of the Augustan reformation: the family restored to 
parentage, the nation to agriculture, the Empire to peace. The central figure 
is unsurpassed; indeed, in its union of mature motherhood and womanly 
beauty, tenderness, and grace, there is a soft perfection unmatched by the 
stately goddesses of the Parthenon. The frieze of the outer wall had a lower 
panel of acanthus scrolls, broad-petaled peonies and poppies, and rich 
clusters of ivy berries; this too is unequaled in its class. Another panel 
showed two processions moving in opposite directions to meet before the 
altar of the Goddess of Peace. In these groups are grave and quiet figures, 
probably of Augustus, Livia, and the imperial family, with nobles, priests. 
Vestal Virgins, and children. These last are engagingly real in their shy 
innocence. One is a baby toddling along with no taste for ceremony; another 
is a boy already proud of his years; another a little girl with a nosegay; an- 
other, after some mischief, is being gently admonished by his mother. Hence- 
forth children would play a rising role in Itahan art. But never again would 
Roman sculpture show such mastery of drapery, such natural and effective 
grouping, such modulations of light and shade. Here, as in Virgil, propa- 
ganda had found a perfect medium. 

The only Roman rivals of these reliefs are the carvings on the arches 
raised for the entry of triumphing generals. The finest survivor is the Arch 
of Titus, begun by Vespasian and completed by Domitian to commemorate 


* The largest fragments were till recently in the Museo delle Terme at Rome; others were 
in the Vatican, the Uffizi Gallery at Florence, and in the Louvre. 



ROME AND ITS ART 


CHAP, XVl) 


349 


the capture of Jerusalem. One relief shows the burning city, its walls in 
ruins, its people wild with fear, its wealth looted by legionaries; another 
pictures Titus riding into Rome in his chariot amid soldiers, animals, magis- 
trates, priests, and prisoners, followed by the holy candelabra of the Temple, 
and varied spoils of war. The artists here experimented bravely: they cut 
different figures to different levels, and distributed them on diverse planes; 
they chiseled the background to give an illusion of depth; and they painted 
the whole to convey additional shades of fullness and distance. The action 
was shown not in separate episodes but in continuity, as on the friezes of 
Mesopotamia and Egypt, and later on the columns of Trajan and Aurelius; 
so the sense of motion and life was better conveyed. The figures were not 
ideahzed and softened into a mood of Attic repose as in the Hellenistic 
Ara Pads; they were taken from the flesh and the dirt, and carved in the 
earthy tradition of Itahan reahsm and vitahty. The subject was not perfect 
gods but living men. 

It is this vigorous realism that distinguishes Roman sculpture from the 
Greek; but for this recurrent fidelity to their own bent the Romans would 
have added little to art. About 90 b.c. a Greek from south Italv, Pasiteles, 
went to Rome, lived there for sixty years, did excellent work in silver, ivory, 
and gold, introduced silver mirrors, made skillful copies of Greek master- 
pieces, and wrote five volumes on the history of art; he was both the Vasari 
and the Cellini of his time. Another Greek, Arcesilaus, made for Caesar a 
famous statue of his distant relative, ^'^enus Genetrix. Apollonius of Athens, 
probably in Rome, carved the powerful Torso Belvedere of the Vatican: 
a work conceived with moderation, proclaiming no bulging muscles, but 
showing a man in the fullness of healthy strength; we can only say of it 
that it is perfect so far as it goes. For a time the studios busied themselves 
giving Greek form to Itahan gods, even to divine abstractions like Chance 
and Chastity. Presumably in this period and in Rome Glycon of Athens 
carved the Famese Hercules. We cannot tell to what age or country the 
Apollo Belvedere belongs; perhaps it was a Roman copy of an original by 
Leochares of Athens. Every student knows how its calm beauty stirred 
Winckelmann to Uranian ecstasy."^ Juno received now two renowned em- 
bodiments: the porphyry Famese Juno of the Naples Museum and the 
Ludovisi Juno of the Terme— cold and stem, righteous and just; one begins 
to understand Jove’s wanderings. 

All these, and the graceful Perseus a 7 jd Andro?neda of the CapitoHne 
Museum, were in the Greek style, idealized and generalized, and tiresomely 
divine. More arresting are the portrait busts that constimte a bronze-and- 
marble dictionary of Roman physiognomy from Pompey to Constantine. 
Some of these too are idealized, particularly the Julio-Claudian heads; but 



CAESAR AND CHRIST 


350 


(chap. XVI 


the old Etruscan realism, and the ever-present example of unflattering 
death masks, reconciled the Romans to being represented as ugly, provided 
they were shown as strong. So many of them bequeathed their effigies to 
pubhc places that at times Rome seemed to belong less to the quick than to 
the dead. Some worthies could not bide their end, but erected themselves 
as statues before their death, until the jealous emperors, to make room for 
the living, forbade such premature immortality. 

The greatest of the portrait busts is the so-named Head of Caesar, of 
black basalt, in Berlin. We do not know whom it represents; but the sparse 
hair and sharp chin, the thin and bony face, the heavy lines of weary thought, 
the resolution yielding to disillusionment, accord well with the traditional 
attribution. Only second to it is the colossal head of Caesar in Naples: here 
the wrinkles have set almost into bitterness, as if the giant had at last dis- 
covered that no mind is broad enough to understand, much less to rule, the 
world. Realistic to repulsiveness is the Pompey of the Ny Carlsberg Glyp- 
totek in Copenhagen; all the brave triumphs of his youth forgotten in the 
dull obesity of a beaten man. Of Augustus we have half a hundred statues, 
many of them masterly: Augustus the boy (in the Vatican), serious, keen, 
noble— the finest portrait of an actual youth in any age; Augustus at thirty 
(in the British Museum)— a bronze figure of burning determination, remind- 
ing us of Suetonius’ statement that the Emperor could quell a mutiny with 
a glance; Augustus the priest (in the Terme), a profound and pensive face 
emerging from a prison of drapery; and Augustus imperator, found in the 
ruins of Livia’s vflla at Prima Porta, and now in the Vatican. The breast- 
plate of this famous figure is covered with esoteric and distracting reliefs,* 
the pose is stiff, the legs are too mighty for such an invahd; but the head 
has a quiet and self-confident power that reveals the hand and soul of a 
great artist— who could not quite forget the Doryphoros of Polycleitus. 

Livia herself was fortunate in the artist who made the head now in 
Copenhagen, The hair is stately, the bent Roman nose smacks of character, 
the eyes are thoughtful and tender, the lips pretty but firm; this is the 
woman who stood quietly behind Augustus’ throne, overthrew all her rivals 
and enemies, and mastered everybody but her son. Tiberius too fared well; 
idealized though it is, the seated figure in the Lateran Museum is a chef- 
d’oeuvre worthy of the hand that carved the diorite Chepbren in Cairo. 
Claudius was not so lucky; surely the sculptor was making fun of him, or 
illustrating Seneca’s Fumpkinification, when he carved him up as a worried 
Jupiter, fat and amiable and dumb. Nero tried hard to develop a sense of 

• They portray the return of the Parthian standards, the submission of the conquered 
provinces, the fertility of the earth (Terra Mater) at peace, and the mantle of protection spread 
over all by Jove. 



ROME AND ITS ART 


CHAP. XVl) 


351 


beauty, but his real passion was for fame and size; he saw no better function 
for Zenodotus, the Scopas of this age, than to consume his time in making 
a colossus of Nero as Apollo, 1 17 feet high.* Hadrian had it removed to the 
foreground of the Flavian Amphitheater, which thence derived its name of 
Colosseum.^^ 

With the honest Vespasian sculpture returned to reality. He let himself 
be represented frankly as a veritable plebeian, with coarse features, wrinkled 
brow, bald head, and enormous ears. Kinder is the bust in the Terme, show- 
ing a spirit harassed with affairs of state, or the businesshke face of the 
massive head in Naples. Titus comes down to us with a hke cubical cranium 
and homely countenance; it is hard to think of this stout street vendor as 
the darhng of mankind. Domitian had the good sense, in the realistic Flavian 
age, to have himself so hated in life that all his images were ordered destroyed 
after his death. 

When the artist left the palace and roamed the streets he could give free 
play to the Itahc imp of humorous truth. Some old man, surely less equipped 
with wisdom and denarii than the philosopher-premier, posed for the 
disheveled scarecrow once labeled Seneca. Athletes had their muscles im- 
mortahzed for a moment by famous artists; and gladiators, as statues, found 
entry into the best homes, from patrician villas to Famese palaces. The 
Roman sculptors relented when they handled the figures of women; now 
and then they carved an irascible shrew, but also they molded some Vestal 
Virgins of a graceful gravity, occasional incarnations of tenderness like the 
Clytie of the British Museum, and aristocratic ladies as fragilely charming 
as the dolls of Watteau or Fragonard.^® They were adept in the portrayal 
of children, as in the bronze Boy of the Metropolitan Museum, or the 
Innocenza of the Capitoline. They could chisel or cast the forms of animals 
with starthng vividness, as in the wolves’ heads found at Nemi in 1 92 9, or the 
prancing horses of St. Mark’s. They seldom achieved the smooth perfection 
of the Periclean schools; but that was because they loved tjie individual more 
than the type, and rehshed the life-giving imperfections of the real. With 
all their limitations they stand supreme in the history of portrait art. 


VI. PAINTING 

The ancient visitor would have found painting even more popular than 
sculpture in Rome’s temples and dwelhngs, porticoes and squares. He would 
have come upon many works of old masters there— Polygnotus, Zeuxis, 

* With its pedestal, 153. The Statue of Liberty, without its base, is 104 feet in height. 



352 CAESAR AND CHRIST ( CHAP. XVI 

Apelles, Protogenes, and others— as dear to the opulent Empire as the paint- 
ings of the Renaissance are to rich America; and he would have seen in 
greater abundance, through their better preservation, the products of 
Alexandrian and Roman schools. The art was old in Italy, where every wall 
craved ornament. Once even Roman nobles had practiced it; but the 
Hellenistic invasion had made painting Greek and servile, and at last Valerius 
Maximus marveled that Fabius Pictor should have stooped to paint murals 
in the Temple of Health.*^ There were exceptions: toward the end of the 
Republic Arellius made a name for himself by hiring prostitutes to pose for 
his goddesses; in the time of Augustus a dumb aristocrat, Quintus Pedius, 
took up painting because his defect closed most professions to him; and 
Nero employed for the interior of his Golden House one Amulius, who 
“painted with the greatest gravity, always in his toga.” But such men 
were rari names in the crowd of Greeks who, at Rome and Pompeii and 
throughout the peninsula, made copies or variations of Greek paintings on 
Greek or Egyptian themes. 

The art was practically limited to fresco and tempera. In fresco a freshly 
plastered wall was painted with water-moistened colors; in tempera the 
pigments were mixed with an adhesive sizing and laid upon a dry surface. 
Portrait painters sometimes employed an encaustic process in which the 
tints were fused in hot wax. Nero had his picture painted on a canvas 120 
feet high— the first known use of this material. Painting, as we have seen, 
was applied to statues, temples, stage scenery, and great linen pictures 
intended for exhibition in triumphs or in the Forum; but its favored re- 
ceptacle was the external or internal wall. The Romans seldom placed 
furniture against a wall or hung pictures there; they preferred to use the 
entire space for one painting, or for a group of related designs. In this way 
the mural became a part of the house, an integral item in the architectural 
design. 

The caustic humor of \Tsuvius has presented for us some 3 500 frescoes— 
more paintings at Pompeii than can be found in all the rest of the classic 
world. Since Pompeii was a minor town we may imagine how many such 
murals brightened the homes and shrines of classic Italy. The best survivors 
have been removed to the Naples Museum; even there their lithe grace 
impresses us; but only the ancients knew them in the full depth of their 
color and in the architectural framework that gave each picture a func- 
tion and a place. In the House of Vettii the murals have been left m situ: 
in a dining room Dionysus surprises the sleeping Ariadne; on the opposite 
wall Daedalus displays his wooden cow to Pasiphae; at the farther end 
Hermes looks on calmly as Hephaestus fastens Ixion to the torturing wheel; 
and in another room a succession of humorous frescoes shows carefree 



ROME AND ITS ART 


CHAP. XVl) 


353 


Cupids parodying the industries of Pompeii, including the wine business of 
the Vettii. The bite of time has gnawed into these once brilliant surfaces, 
but enough remains to shock the visitor into modesty; the figures are almost 
perfectly drawn, and so colorful with the flesh of life that they can still 
make the blood stir lustily in living veins. 

It is by reference to these Pompeian paintings that connoisseurs have tried 
to understand the nature, and classify the periods and styles, of pictorial 
art in ancient Italy. The method is precarious, for Pompeii was more Greek 
than Latin; but what remains of classic painting in Rome and its suburbs 
falls in tolerably well with the Pompeian development. In the First or In- 
crustation Style (second century b.c.) walls were often colored to resemble 
inlaid marble slabs {cnistae), as in the “House of Sallust” at Pompeii. In the 
Second or Architectural Style (first century b.c.) the wall was painted to 
simulate a building or fagade or colonnade. Often the columns were repre- 
sented as seen from within, and open country was pictured between them; 
in this way the artist gave to a probably windowless room cool vistas of 
trees and flowers, fields and streams, peaceful or playful animals; the im- 
prisoned dweller could fancy himself in Lucullus’ gardens by merely look- 
ing at the wall; he might fish or row or hunt, or indulge a fondness for birds 
without suffering their untimeliness; nature was taken into the house. The 
Third or Ornate Style (a.d. 1-50) employed architectural forms purely 
for ornament, and subordinated landscape to figures. In the Fourth or Intri- 
cate Style (a.d. 50-79) the artist let his fancy riot, invented fantastic struc- 
tures and shapes, placed them in positions gaily scornful of gravity, piled 
gardens and columns, villas and pavilions, upon one another in modernistic 
disarray,-® and occasionally achieved the impressionistic effect of a picture 
supplemented by unconscious memory and suffused with light. In all these 
kindred styles architecture was handmaid and mistress to painting, served it 
and used it, and gave body to a tradition that reawoke, after sixteen cen- 
turies, in Nicolas Poussin. 

It is a pity that the subjects of the major extant paintings so seldom 
venture beyond Greek myth. We tire of these same gods and satyrs, heroes 
and sinners— Zeus and Mars, Dionysus and Pan, Achilles and Odysseus, 
Iphigenia and Medea; though a like charge could be brought against the 
Renaissance. There are a few pictures of still life, and here and there a fuller, 
an innkeeper, or a butcher shines on Pompeian walls. Love often dominates 
the scene: a girl sits brooding over some secret longing not unrelated to 
the Eros who stands beside her; young men and women gambol amorously 
on the grass; Psyches and Cupids frolic as if the town had never known any- 
thing but love and wine. If we may judge from their representation in these 
murals, the women of Pompeii deserved to have Life center about their 



CAESAR AND CHRIST 


354 


(chap. XVI 


comeliness. We see them engrossed in the game of “knucklebones,” or lean- 
ing gracefully over a lyre, or composing poetry with a meditative stylus at 
the lips; their faces are quiet with maturity, their forms are healthily full, 
their robes fall about them with Pheidian amplitude and rhythm, they walk 
lik e Helens conscious of their divinity. One of them performs a Bacchic 
dance, apparently in thin air; her right arm, hand, and foot are as lovely 
as anything in the history of painting. Some male characters must be in- 
cluded with these masterpieces: Theseus victor over the Minotaur, Hercules 
rescuing Deianira or adopting Telephus, Achilles angrily surrendering the 
reluctant Briseis; in this last picture every figure nears perfection and 
Pompeian painting is at its best. Humor is represented, too: a disheveled 
pedagogue stumbles forward on his staff; a jolly satyr shakes his shanks 
in sardonic revelry, a bald ribald Silenus is caught in a mood of musical 
ecstasy. Taverns and brothels came in for appropriate decoration, and no 
eager tourist need be told that Priapus still flaunts his precious powers on 
Pompeian walls. At the other end of the gamut, in the Villa Item, is a series 
of religious pictures, suggesting the use of the place for celebrating the 
Dionysian mysteries: in one fresco a little girl, palsied with piety, reads 
from an apparently sacred book; in another a procession of damsels advances, 
blowing pipes and bringing sacrifice; in a third a nude lady dances on tip- 
toe while a neophyte kneels exhausted by some ritualistic whipping.®'' Finer 
than any of these is a mural found in the ruins of Stabiae, presaging Botti- 
ceUi and called Spring: a woman walks slowly through a garden, gathering 
flowers; only her back is seen, and the graceful turning of her head; but 
seldom has any art conveyed so movingly the poetry of this simple theme. 

The most powerful of all the pictures recovered from these ruins is the 
Medea found at Herculaneum, and preserved in the Naples Museum— a 
brooding woman, magnificently draped, meditating the murder of her chil- 
dren; apparently this is a copy of the painting for which Caesar paid the 
artist, Timomachus of Byzantium, forty talents ($144,000).®'“ 

Few pictures of such quahty have been found in Rome. But in the 
suburban villa of Livia at Prima Porta a supreme example was discovered of 
that landscape painting in which Italy so far excels Greece. The eye is lured 
as if across a court to a marble trellis, beyond which is a jungle of plants 
and flowers so accurately reproduced that botanists can now identify and 
catalogue them; every leaf is carefully drawn and colored; birds perch here 
and there as if for a moment, and insects creep amid the foliage. Only less 
masterly is the “Aldobrajidinr Wedding found on the Esquiline in 1606, 
and enthusiastically studied by Rubens, Vandyke, and Goethe. Perhaps 
it is a copy of a Greek work; perhaps it is an original by a Roman Greek, 
or by a Roman; we can only say that these figures— the quiet and timid bride, 



ROME AND ITS ART 


355 


CHAP. XVl) 

the goddess who counsels her, the mother absorbed in preparations, the 
maidens waiting to play the lyre and sing— are all done with a delicacy and 
sensitivity that make this mural a distinguished relic of classic art. 

Roman p aintin g laid no claim to originality; Greek artists carried with 
them everywhere the same traditions and methods; and even the vague 
impressionism of these pictures may be offshoots of Alexandrian skills. But 
there is in them a fineness of line, and a richness of color, that explain why 
painters like Apelles and Protogenes were held in as high repute as sculptors 
like Polycleitus and Praxiteles. Sometimes the color is as full as if Giorgione 
had laid it on; sometimes the subtle gradations of light and shade suggest 
Rembrandt; sometimes a crude figure catches the ungainly realism of 
Van Gogh. Perspective here is often faulty, and hasty workmanship limps 
behind mature conception. But a fresh vitality redeems these faults, the 
rhythm of the drapery lures the eye, and the woodland scenes must have 
been a delight to dwellers in a crowded town. Our taste today is more re- 
strained; we like to leave a wall its own significance, and have hesitated, 
rill yesterday, to cover it with paint. But to the Italian a wall was a prison, 
seldom opening through a window upon the world; he wished to forget the 
barrier, and be deluded by art into some verdant peace. Perhaps he was 
right: better a pictured tree on a wall than a magic casement’s prospect of 
a thousand unkempt rooftops blaspheming the sky and festering in the sun. 


VII. ARCHITECTURE 

1. Principles, Materials, and Forms 

We have reserved for the climactic edification of our forgotten visitor 
the greatest of Rome’s arts, that in which she most ably defended herself 
against the Greek invasion, and displayed all her originality, courage, and 
power. Originality, however, is not parthenogenesis; it is, like parentage, 
a novel combination of pre-existing elements. All cultures are eclectic in 
their youth, as education begins with imitation; but when the soul or nation 
comes of age it stamps its character, if it has any, upon all its works and 
words. Rome, like other Mediterranean cities, took the Doric, Ionic, and 
Corinthian orders from Egypt and Greece; but also she took the arch, the 
vault, and the dome from Asia, and with them made such a city of palaces, 
basihcas, amphitheaters, and baths as the earth had not yet beheld. Roman 
architecture became the art expression of the Roman spirit and state: bold- 
ness, organization, grandeur, and brutal strength raised these unparalleled 
structures upon the hills. They were the Roman soul in stone. 



35<5 CAESAR AND CHRIST (cHAP. XVI 

Most of the leading architects in Rome were Romans, not Greeks. One 
of them, Marcus Vitruvius Pollio, wrote a world classic On Architecture 
(ca. 27 B.c.).* Having served as military engineer under Caesar in Africa, 
and as an architect under Octavian, Vitruvius retired in old age to formulate 
the principles of Rome’s most honored art. “Nature has not given me 
stature,” he confessed, “my face is homely with years, and illness has stolen 
my strength; therefore I hope to win favor by my knowledge and my 
book.” As Cicero and Quintilian made philosophy a prerequisite for the 
orator, so Vitruvius required it of the architect; it would improve his pur- 
poses while science improved his means; it would make him “high-minded, 
urbane, just, loyal, and without greed; for no true work can be done without 
good faith and clean hands.” He described the materials of architecture, 
the orders and their elements, and the diverse types of building in Rome; 
and added discourses on machinery, water clocks, speedometers,! aqueducts, 
town planning, and public sanitation. As against the rectangular design 
established by Hippodamus in many Greek cities, Vitruvius recommended 
the radial arrangement used in Alexandria (and modern Washington); the 
Romans, however, continued to lay out their towns on the rectangular plan 
of their camps. He warned Italy that in several localities its drinking water 
led to goiter, and declared that poisoning could come from working with 
lead. He explained sound as a vibratory motion of the air, and wrote our 
oldest extant discussion of architectural acoustics. His book, rediscovered 
in the Renaissance, deeply influenced Leonardo, Palladio, and Michelangelo. 

The Romans, says Vitruvius, built with wood, brick, stucco, concrete, 
stone, and marble. Bricks were the usual substance of walls, arches, and 
vaults, and served as a frequent facing for concrete. Stucco too was often 
used as a facing. It was made of sand, lime, marble dust, and water, took a 
high polish, and was laid on in several coats, often to a thickness of three 
inches; hence it could keep its form for nineteen centuries, as in some parts 
of the Colosseum. In making and using concrete the Romans were un- 
rivaled until our time. They took the volcanic ash abounding near Naples, 
mixed it with Hme and water, threw in fragments of brick, pottery, marble, 
and stone, and produced, from the second century b.c. onward, an opus 
cae 7 nenticuin as hard as rock, and capable of being poured into almost any 
shape. They cast it as we do, in troughs formed of boards. By its means they 
could cover large unsupported spaces with rigid domes free from the lateral 
thrust of an arched roof; in this way they topped the Pantheon and the 

• Some students suspect the work of being a third-century forgeiy% but the evidence inclines 

toward authenticiw^s 

t More accurately, odometers. A peg attached to the axle of the wheel advanced by a cog 
a smaller wheel, whose much slower revolution caused a pebble to fall into a box.^i ^ * 



ROME AND ITS ART 


CHAP. XVl) 


357 


great baths. Stone was employed for most temples and the more pretentious 
homes. One variety from Cappadocia was so translucent that a temple built 
with it was adequately hghted with all its openings closed.®^ The conquest 
of Greece brought a taste for marble, which was satisfied first by importing 
columns, then marble, and finally by working the Carrara quarries near 
Luna. Before Augustus marble was largely confined to columns and slabs; 
in his time it was used as a facing for brick and concrete; only in this super- 
ficial sense did he leave Rome, here and there, a city of marble; walls of 
solid marble were rare. The Romans hked to mingle in the same building 
the red and gray granite of Egypt, the green cipollino of Euboea, the black 
and yellow marbles of Numidia, with their own white Carrara, and with 
basalt, alabaster, and porphyry. Never had architectural material been so 
complex or so colorful. 

To the Doric, Ionic, and Corinthian orders Rome added the Tuscan and 
Composite styles, and certain modifications. Columns were often monoliths 
instead of superimposed drums. The Doric column received an Ionic base 
and took on a new, unfluted slenderness; the Ionic capital was sometimes 
given four volutes to offer the same appearance^ from every side; the Corin- 
thian column and capital were developed to a delicate beauty beyond any 
Greek example, but in later decades this style was spoiled by undue elabora- 
tions. A like excess poured flowers over the Ionic volutes to make the 
Composite capital, as in the Arch of Titus; sometimes the volutes ended in 
animal or human forms suggestive of gargoyles and presaging medieval 
forms. The lavish Romans often mixed several orders in the same building, 
as in the theater of Marcellus; and then again, with perverse economy, they 
left the side columns attached to the cella, as in the Maison Carree at Nimes. 
Even when the development of the arch had taken from columns their old 
supporting role the Romans added them as functionless ornaments— a custom 
that has survived into our own uncertain age. 


2. The Temples of Rome 

For nearly all her temples Rome kept the Greek trabeate principle- 
architraves (i.e., master beams) upheld by columns and carrying the roof. 
Augustus was conservative in art as in everything else, and most of the 
shrines built by his order clung to the orthodox tradition. From his time on- 
ward the emperors multiplied homes for their Olympic rivals and clothed 
their lechery with an architectural piety that crowded the hills and blocked 
the streets with tiled and gilded fanes. Jupiter, of course, was their favorite 
recipient. Among many he had one as Jupiter Tonans, the Thunderer; an- 



CAESAR AND CHRIST 


358 


(chap. XVI 


other as Jupiter Stator, who had stayed the flight of the Romans in battle; 
and he shared with Juno and Minerva the holiest of Rome’s sanctuaries, atop 
the Capitoline hill. There in the central cell, flanked by a three-storied 
Corinthian colonnade, was the gold-and-ivory colossus of Jupiter Optimus 
Maximus— Jove the Best and Greatest. Tradition ascribed the first form of 
this supreme house of Roman worship to Tarquinius Priscus; it was several 
times burned down and rebuilt; Stilicho (a.d. 404) stole its gold-plated 
bronze doors to pay his soldiers, and the Vandals carried off the gold- 
plated tiles of the roof. Some fragments of the pavement remain. 


On the northern summit of the same hill rose the Temple of Juno Moneta, 
Juno the Monitor or Guardian; here was the Roman mint, and from its name, 
of course, comes our word for the root of much ambition. On the south side of 
the hill was the shrine of Saturn, the oldest god of the Capitol; the Romans 
dated its first dedication at 497 b.c.; eight Ionic columns and an architrave sur- 
vive. In the Forum, at the foot of the hill, was the little Temple of Janus, god of 
all beginnings; its doors were opened only in time of war, and were closed but 
three times in Rome’s ancient history. At the southeast comer of the Forum 
stood the Temple of Castor and Pollux, erected in 495 b.c.; three slender Corin- 
thian columns have come dov-n to us from the reconstruction by Tiberius; they 
are by common consent the finest columns in Rome. 

In his own forum Augustus added a Temple of Mars Ultor— the Avenger- 
vowed before Philippi; three of its majestic columns stand. One end of its cella 
was a semicircular apse, an architectural form destined to become the chancel of 
early Christian churches. On the Palatine Augustus built entirely of marble a 
sumptuous temple to Apollo for the god’s help at Actium; he adorned it with 
sculptures by Myron and Scopas, added a splendid library and an art gallery to 
its enclosure, and did all he could to make men feel that the god had left Greece 
for Rome and had brought with him the spiritual and cultural leadership of the 
world. It was even tvhispered by Augustus’ friends, now that his mother was 
safely dead, that Apollo, disguised as an agile snake, had begotten the subtle 
prince. 

In the northwest part of the city was a great shrine to Isis, and on the Palatine 
a spacious sanctuary for Cybele. Handsome shelters were provided for personi- 
fied abstractions— Health, Honor, Virtue, Concord, Faith, Fortune, and many 
more. Nearly all of these contained galleries of statuar)^ and painting. In his great 
Temple of Peace Vespasian gathered for the general eye many of the art treasures 
of Nero’s Golden House, and som.e of the relics of Jerusalem. The Temple of 
Fortuna Virilis, in the Forum Boarium, has the distinction of being the most com- 
pletely preserved of the pre-Augustan buildings in Rome. The ladies of the 
capital frequently worshipped there, for the goddess, they believed, would teach 
them how to conceal their defects from men. 

To these and a hundred other temples in the classic rectangular style the archi- 



ROME AND ITS ART 


CHAP. XVl) 


359 


tects of Rome added several circular temples, which revealed a new mastery of 
the problems presented by a dome. Tradition derived this type from the round 
hut of Romulus, religiously preserved on the Palatine for many centuries. Almost 
as old was the pretty Aedes Vestae, or House of Vesta, near the Temple of 
Castor and Pollux; its circular cella, faced with white marble, was enclosed by 
handsome Corinthian columns, and its roof was a dome of gilded brass. Adjoin- 
ing it was the Palace of the Vestals— eighty-four rooms built cloisterwise around 
a peristyled court, the Atrhan Vestae. The Pantheon was not yet a circular 
temple; as built by Agrippa it was rectangular, but had a circular plaza before it; 
Hadrian’s architects raised over this space the round temple and mighty dome 
which are still among the bravest works of man. 


3. The Arcuate Revolutiott 

Rome was greater in her secular than in her sacred architecture. For 
here she could escape the bondage of tradition and unite engineering with 
art— utility and power with beauty and form— in a manner all her own. The 
principle of Greek architecture had been the straight line (however deli- 
cately modulated as in the Parthenon) : the vertical column, the horizontal 
architrave, the triangular pediment. The principle of specifically Roman 
architecture was to be the curt^e. The Romans wanted grandeur, audacity, 
size; but they could not roof their vast buildings on rectilinear and trabeate 
principles except by a maze of impeding columns. They solved the problem 
with the arch, usually in its rounded form; with the vault, which is a pro- 
longed arch; and with the dome, which is a rotated arch. Perhaps Roman 
generals and their aides had brought from Egypt and Asia a growing famili- 
arity with arcuate shapes, and had reawakened early Roman and Etruscan 
traditions long overwhelmed by orthodox Greek styles. Now Rome em- 
ployed the arch on so great a scale that the whole art of building took from 
this form a new and lasting name. By laying a web of brick ribs along the 
lines of strain before pouring concrete into the wooden frame of the roof, 
the Romans developed the articulated vault; by crossing two cylindrical or 
barrel vaults at right angles they produced a network of ribs and groins 
that could sustain a heavier superstructure and bear more lateral thrust. 
These were the principles of Rome’s arcuate revolution. 

It was in the great baths and amphitheaters that the new style reached 
its completion. The baths of Agrippa, Nero, and Titus were the first of a 
long series that culminated in the Baths of Diocletian. They were monu- 
mental buildings of concrete faced with stucco or brick, and rising to 
majestic heights. The interiors w'cre richly decorated with marble and 
mosaic pavements, varicolored columns, coffered ceilings, paintings, and 



360 CAESAR AND CHRIST (cHAP. XVI 

Statuary. They were equipped with dressing rooms, hot and cold baths, an 
intermediate room of warm air, swimming pools, palaestras, libraries, read- 
ing rooms, research rooms, lounges, and probably art galleries. Most of the 
chambers were centrally heated by large clay pipes running under floors 
and within the walls. These thermae were the most spacious and sumptuous 
public buildings ever erected, and they have never been equaled in their 
class. They were part of that sociahsm of recreation with which the princi- 
pate excused its growing monarchy.* 

This same paternalism built the greatest theaters in history. Those of 
Rome were much fewer but larger than those of modern capitals. The 
smallest was that which Cornelius Balbus built in the Field of Mars ( 1 3 b.c.) , 
seating 7700; Augustus rebuilt Pompey’s theater, seating 17,500; he com- 
pleted another, named for Marcellus, seating 20,500. Unlike Greek theaters, 
these were walled, and the stands were supported by arched and vaulted 
masonry instead of resting on the slope of a hill. Only the stage was roofed; 
but often the audience was sheltered from the sun by a linen awning 
{velarium'), which in Pompey’s theater covered a space 550 feet wide. Over 
the entrances were boxes for dignitaries and magnates. Some stages had 
curtains which, when the play began, were not raised aloft, but lowered 
into a groove. The stage was elevated some five feet. Its background usually 
took the form of an elaborate building which, extending from wing to 
wing, helped the actors to throw their voices out over the immense audi- 
ences. Seneca speaks of “stage mechanics who invent scaffolding that goes 
aloft of its o^vn accord, or floors that rise silently into the air.” A change 
of scene was effected by revolving prisms, or by moving a set into the wings 
or into the loft, thereby exposing the next. Acoustics were aided by sinking 
hollow jars into the floor and walls of the stage.^-'’ The auditorium was 
cooled by rivulets of water running along the passages; sometimes a mixture 
of water, wine, and crocus juice was conducted by pipes to the highest 
tiers and thence scattered over the audience as a perfumed spray. Statues 
adorned the interior, and large pictures were painted as scenery. Probably 
no theater or opera house in the world today could equal the size and 
splendor of Pompey’s. 

More popular still were the circus, the stadium, and the amphitheater. 
Rome had several stadiums, used chiefly for athletic contests. Horse or 
chariot races, and some spectacles, were presented at the Circus Flaminius 
in the Field of Mars, or, more usually, at the Circus Maximus as rebuilt by 
Caesar between the Palatine and Aventine hills. This was an i.mmense ellipse 

* The Roman baths provided models for many modem structures faced with like problems 
of covering great spaces with a minimum of obstmction. The Pennsylvania Station and Grand 
Central Terminal in New York are outstanding examples. 



CHAP, rv'l) ROME AND ITS ART 361 

2 200 feet long and 705 feet wide, with wooden seats on three sides for 
180,000 spectators.®® We may judge the wealth of Rome by noting that 
Trajan rebuilt these seats in marble. 

By comparison the Colosseum was a modest structure, seating only 50,000. 
Its plan was not new; the cities of Greek Italy had long since had amphi- 
theaters; Curio, as we have seen, coinposed one in 53 b.c.; Caesar built an- 
other in 46, Statilius Taurus another in 29 b.c. The Flavian Amphitheater, 
as Rome called the Colosseum, was begun by Vespasian and finished by Titus 
(a.d. 80); the architect’s name is unknown. Vespasian chose as its site the 
lake in the gardens of Nero’s Golden House, between the Caelian and Pala- 
tine hills. It "was constructed of travertine stone in an ellipse 1790 feet 
around. Its external wall rose 157 feet and was divided into three stories, 
the first partly supported by Tuscan-Doric, the second by Ionic, the third 
by Corinthian, columns, with an arch in each intercolumnar space. The main 
corridors were roofed with barrel vaults, sometimes crossed in the style of 
medieval cloisters. The interior was also divided into three tiers, each upheld 
by arches, divided into concentric rings of boxes or seats, and cut by stair- 
ways into cunei, “wedges.” The aspect of the interior today is that of a 
mass of masonry into which some giant artisan has cut the arches, passages, 
and seats. Statues and other decorations adorned the whole, and many rows 
of seats were in marble. There were eighty entrances, two of them reserved 
for the emperor and his suite; these entrances and the exits {vovntoria) 
could empty the gigantic bowl in a few minutes. The arena, 2 87 by 1 80 feet, 
was surrounded by a fifteen-foot wall topped with an iron grating to protect 
brutes from beasts. The Colosseum is not a beautiful building, and its very 
immensity reveals a certain coarseness, as well as grandeur, in the Roman 
character. It is only the most imposing of all the ruins left by the classic 
world. The Romans built like giants; it would have been too much to ask 
that they should finish like jewelers. 

Roman art had taken over in eclectic confusion the Attic, Asiatic, and 
Alexandrian styles— restraint, immensity, and elegance; it never quite com- 
bined them into that organic unity which is one requisite of beauty. There 
is something Oriental in the crude strength of the typically Roman build- 
ings; they are awe-inspiring rather than beautiful; even Hadrian’s Pantheon 
is a structural mangel rather than an artistic whole. Except in certain mo- 
ments, as in the Augustan reliefs and the glass, w'e must not look here for 
delicacy of feeling or refinement of execution; we must expect an engineer’s 
art that seeks the perfection of stability, economy, and use, a parvenu’s 
infatuation with immensity and ornament, a soldier’s insistence on realism, 
a warrior’s art of overwhelming force. The Romans did not finish like 



362 CAESAR AND CHRIST ( CHAP. XVI 

jewelers because conquerors do not become jewelers. They finished Hke 
conquerors. 

Without doubt they created the most influential and fascinating city in 
history. They made a plastic, pictorial, and structural art that every man 
could understand, and a city that every citizen could use. The free masses 
were poor, but in some measure they owned much of the wealth of Rome; 
they ate the com of the state, they sat at almost no cost in the theaters, the 
circuses, the amphitheaters, and the stadiums; they exercised, refreshed, 
amused, and educated themselves in the baths, they enjoyed the shade of a 
hundred colonnades, and walked under decorated porticoes that covered 
many miles of street and three miles in the Field of Mars alone. Never had 
the world seen such a metropoUs. At its center a tumulmous Forum busy 
with business, resounding with oratory, ahve with empire-shaking debates; 
then a ring of majestic temples, basilicas, palaces, theaters, and baths, in a 
profusion without parallel; then a ring of humming shops and teeming tene- 
ments; still another ring of homes and gardens, again with temples and public 
baths; and last of all, a circle of villas and estates pushing the city into the 
countryside and binding the mountains with the sea: this was the Rome of 
the Caesars— proud, powerful, brilhant, materialistic, cruel, iniquitous, 
chaotic, and sublime. 



CHAPTER XVH 


Epicurean Rome 

30 B.C.-A.D. 96 


I. THE PEOPLE 

1 ET US enter these dwellings, temples, theaters, and baths, and see how 
J these Romans lived; we shall find them more interesting than their art. 
We must at the outset recall that by Nero’s time they were only geographi- 
cally Roman. The conditions that Augustus had failed to check— celibacy, 
childlessness, abortion, and infanticide among the older stocks, manumission 
and comparative fertility among the new— had transformed the racial char- 
acter, the moral temper, even the physiognomy, of the Roman people. 

Once the Romans had been precipitated into parentage by the impetus 
of sex, and lured to it by anxiety for the post-mortem care of their graves; 
now the upper and middle classes had learned to separate sex from parentage, 
and were skeptical about the afterworld. Once the rearing of children had 
been an obligation of honor to the state, enforced by public opinion; now 
it seemed absurd to demand more births in a city crowded to the point of 
redolence. On the contrary, wealthy bachelors and childless husbands con- 
tinued to be courted by sycophants longing for legacies. “Nothing,” said 
Juvenal, “will so endear you to your friends as a barren wife.” ^ “Crotona,” 
says a character in Petronius, “has only two classes of inhabitants— flatterers 
and flattered; and the sole crime there is to bring up children to inherit your 
money. It is hke a battlefield at rest: nothing but corpses and the crows that 
pick them.” ^ Seneca consoled a mother who had lost her only child by 
reminding her how popular she would now be; for “with us childlessness 
gives more power than it takes away.” ® The Gracchi had been a family of 
twelve children; probably not five families of such abundance could be 
found in Nero’s age in patrician or equestrian Rome. Marriage, which had 
once been a hfelong economic union, was now among a hundred thousand 
Romans a passing advenmre of no great spiritual significance, a loose con- 
tract for the mutual provision of physiological conveniences or pohtical aid. 
To escape the testatory disabilities of the unmarried some women took 
eunuchs as contraceptive husbands; ^ some entered into sham wedlock with 
poor men on the understanding that the wife need bear no children and 

3<53 



CAESAR AND- CHRIST 


364 


(chap, xvii 


might have as many lovers as she pleased.® Contraception was practiced in 
both its mechanical and chemical forms.® If these methods failed there were 
many ways of procuring abortion. Philosophers and the law condemned it, 
but the finest families practiced it. “Poor women,” says Juvenal, “endure 
the perils of childbirth, and all the troubles of nursing . . . but how often 
does a gilded bed harbor a pregnant woman? So great is the skill, so powerful 
the drugs, of the abortionist!” Nevertheless, he tells the husband, “rejoice; 
give her the potion . . . for were she to bear the child you might find 
yourself the father of an Ethiopian.” ’’ In so enlightened a society infanticide 
was rare.* 

The infertility of the moneyed classes was so offset by immigration and 
the fecundity of the poor that the population of Rome and the Empire 
continued to grow. Beloch estimated it at 800,000 for the Rome of the 
early Empire, Gibbon at 1,200,000, Marquardt at i, 600,000. f Beloch com- 
puted the population of the Empire at 54,000,000, Gibbon at 120,000,000.^^ 
The aristocracy was as numerous as before, but it was almost wholly altered 
in origin. We hear no more of the Aemilii, Claudii, Fabii, Valerii; only the 
Comelii remained of the proud clans that, as late as Caesar, had strutted their 
Rome. Some had vanished through war or political execution; others had 
faded out through family limitation, physiological degeneration, or an im- 
poverishment that had lowered them into the plebeian mass. Their places 
had been taken by Roman businessmen, Italian municipal dignitaries, and 
provincial nobles. In a.d. 56 a senator declared that “most of the knights, 
and many of the senators, were descendants of slaves.” After a generation 
or two the new optimates adopted the wavs of their predecessors, had fewer 
children and more luxuries, and surrendered to inundation from the East. 

First had come the Greeks— not so much from the mainland as from 
Cyrenaica, Egypt, Syria, and Asia Minor. They were eager, clever, facile 
semi-Orientals; many of them small traders or import merchants; some of 
them scientists, writers, teachers, artists, physicians, musicians, actors; some 
sincerely, some venally, devoted to philosophy; some of them able ad- 
ministrators and financiers, many of them without moral scruple, nearly all 
without religious belief. The majority had come as slaves and were not an 
ideal selection; freed, they kept their external servility, their internal hatred 
and scorn of the rich Roman who lived intellectually on the cultural leavings 
of ancient Hellas. The streets of the capital were now noisy with restless 


• Sometimes, in the first century, girls or illegitimate children were exposed, usually at the 
base of the Columna Lactaria— so named because the state provided wet nurses to feed and save 
the infants found there.u> The abandonment of unwanted babies, however, is a custom to be 
found in all but the most uncivilized societies, 
t In 1937 the population of Rome was 1,178,000. 



EPICUREAN ROME 


CHAP. XVIl) 


365 


and voluble Greeks; the Greek language was more often heard there than 
the Latin; if one wished to be read by all classes he had to write in Greek. 
Nearly all the early Christians in Rome spoke Greek; so did the Syrians, 
the Egyptians, and the Jews. A large colony of Egyptians— traders, artisans, 
artists— hved in the Field of Mars. Syrians, thin, affable, shrewd, were every- 
where in the capital, busy with trade, handicrafts, secretarial work, finance, 
and chicanery. 

The Jews were already in Caesar’s time a substantial element in the popu- 
lation of the capital. A few had come as early as 140 b.c.;^® many had been 
brought to Rome as war captives after Pompey’s campaign of 63 b.c. They 
were rapidly emancipated, partly by their industry and thrift, partly be- 
cause their strict adherence to their religious customs was inconvenient for 
their masters. By 59 b.c. there were so many Jewish citizens in the assem- 
blies that Cicero represented opposition to them as political temerity.^^ In 
general the republican party was hostile to the Jews, the populares and the 
emperors were friendly.^® * By the end of the first century they numbered 
some 20,000 in the capital.^® They lived mostly on the west side of the Tiber, 
where they suffered periodically from the floods. They worked on the 
near-by docks, engaged in handicrafts and retail business, and peddled goods 
through the city. There were some rich men among them, but only a few 
great merchants; Syrians and Greeks dominated international commerce. 
Synagogues were numerous in Rome, and each had its school, its scribes, 
and its gerousia, or senate of elders.^® The separatism of the Jews, their 
scorn of polytheism and image worship, the severity of their morals, their 
refusal to attend the theaters or the games, their strange customs and cere- 
monies, their poverty and resultant uncleanliness, led to the usual racial 
antagonisms. Juvenal denounced their fertility, Tacitus their monotheism, 
Ammianus Marcelhnus their fondness for garlic.^** Bad feeling was heightened 
by the bloody capture of Jerusalem, and the procession of Jewish captives 
and sacred spoils featured in the triumph of Titus and in the refiefs on his 
arch. Vespasian heaped insult upon injury by ordering that the half shekel 
paid annually by the Jews of the Dispersion for the upkeep of the Temple at 
Jerusalem should henceforth be contributed yearly to the rebuilding of 

* They supported Caesar consistently and were in turn protected by him. Augustus followed 
suit; but Tiberius, hostile to aU foreign faiths, conscripted 4000 of them for almost suicidal 
soldiering in Sardinia, and expelled the rest from Rome (a.d. 19).'® Twelve years later, con- 
vinced that he had been misled in this matter by Sejanus, he withdrew his edict and ordered 
that the Jews should be unmolested in the practice of their religion and the pursuit of their 
customs.i'^ Caligula protected them in Rome and oppressed them abroad. Claudius exiled some 
because of riots, but by a general edict (42) confirmed the right of the Jews throughout the 
Empire to live by their own laws. In 94 Domitian banished the Jews of Rome to the valley of 

Egeria; in 96 Nerva brought them back, restored their civic rights, and allowed them a gen- 
eration of peace. 



366 CAESAR AND CHRIST (CHAP. 3CVII 

Rome, Nevertheless, many educated Romans admired Jewish monotheism; 
some were converted to Judaism, and several, even of high family, observed 
the Jewish Sabbath as a day of worship and rest.®^ 

If we add to the Greeks, the Syrians, the Egyptians, and the Jews some 
Numidians, Nubians, and Ethiopians from Africa; a few Arabs, Parthians, 
Cappadocians, Armenians, Phrygians, and Bithynians from Asia; powerful 
“barbarians” from Dalmatia, Thrace, Dacia, and Germany; mustachioed 
nobles from Gaul, poets and peasants from Spain, and “tattooed savages 
from Britain” we get an ethnic picture of a very heterogeneous and 
cosmopolitan Rome. Martial marveled at the pliable facility with which the 
courtesans of Rome readjusted their language and their charms to so varied 
and polyglot a chentele.^® Juvenal complained that the Orontes, Syria’s great 
river, was flowing into the Tiber,^^ and Tacitus described the capital as “the 
cesspool of the world.” Oriental faces, ways, dress, words, gestures, quar- 
rels, ideas, and faiths made up a great part of the city’s seething hfe. By the 
third century the government would be an Oriental monarchy; by the 
fourth the rehgion of Rome would be an Oriental creed, and the masters of 
the world would kneel to the god of the slaves. 

There were elements of nobility in this motley crowd. It showed its con- 
tempt of Nero’s mistress Poppaea when angry senators dared not speak, and 
it stormed the senate house to protest the wholesale slaughter of Pedanius 
Secundus’ slaves.^® The simple virtues of the common man were not wanting 
in it; the family hfe of the Jews was exemplary, and the httle Christian com- 
munities were troubhng the pleasure-mad pagan world with their piety and 
their decency. But most of the inflowing peoples had hterally been demor- 
alized by uprootage from their native surroundings, cultures, and moral 
codes; years of slavery had destroyed in them that self-respect which is the 
backbone of upright conduct; and daily friction with groups of different 
customs had worn away still more of their custom-made morality. If Rome 
had not engulfed so many men of alien blood in so brief a time, if she had 
passed all these newcomers through her schools instead of her slums, if she 
had treated them as men with a hundred potential excellences, if she had 
occasionally closed her gates to let assimiliation catch up with infiltration, she 
might have gained new racial and hterary vitahty from the infusion, and 
might have remained a Roman Rome, the voice and citadel of the West. The 
task was too great. The victorious city was doomed by the vastness and 
diversity of her conquests, her native blood was diluted in the ocean of her 
subjects, her educated classes were drawn down by the power of numbers to 
the culture of those who had been her slaves. Much breeding overcame good 
breeding; the fertile conquered became masters in the sterile master’s house. 



CHAP. XVIl) 


EPICUREAN ROME 


3 < 5 ? 


II. EDUCATION 

We do not know much of Roman childhood, but we can judge from Roman 
art and epitaphs that when children came they were loved not wisely but too 
well. Juvenal interrupts his wrath to write a tender passage on the good examples 
we must place before our children’s eyes, the evil sights and sounds we must 
keep from them, the respect that we should show them even in the excesses of 
our love .27 Favorinus, in a discourse premimicking Rousseau, begged mothers to 
nurse their babes.^® Seneca and Plutarch spoke to the same effect, which was 
slight indeed; wet-nursing was the rule in all families that could afford it, with 
no evident tragedies ensuing.* 

Early education came from the nurse, who was usually Greek. There were 
fairy tales beginning, “Once upon a time a king and a queen . . .” Primary 
schooling was still entrusted to private enterprise. Rich men often hired tutors for 
their children, but Quintilian, like Emerson, warned against this as depriving the 
child of formative friendships and stimulating rivalries. Ordinarily the boy and 
girl of the free classes entered at the age of seven an elementary school, accom- 
panied each way by a paedagogus (“child-leader”) to guard his safety and his 
morals. Such schools existed everywhere in the Empire, even in small country 
towns; the wall scribblings at Pompeii suggest a general Uteracy, and probably 
education was then as widespread in the Mediterranean world as at any time be- 
fore or since. Both the paedagogus and the teacher {ludi magister, “schoolmas- 
ter”) were usually Greek freedmen or slaves. In Horace’s youth and native town 
each pupil paid the teacher eight asses (forty-eight cents) monthly; 350 years 
later Diocletian fixed the maximum fee for the elementary teacher at fifty 
denarii ($20) per month per pupil; we may judge from this the rise of the 
teacher and the fall of the as. 

About the age of thirteen the successful student, of either sex, was graduated 
into a secondary or high school; Rome had twenty of these in a.d. 130. Here 
the scholars studied more grammar, the Greek language, Latin and Greek litera- 
ture, music, astronomy, history, mythology, and philosophy, generally through 
lecture-commentaries on the classic poets. Up to this point the girls seem to 
have taken the same courses as the boys, but they often sought additional instruc- 
tion in music and dancing. Since the secondary teachers {grammatici) were 
nearly always Greek freedmen, they naturally emphasized Greek literature and 
history; Roman culture took on a Greek tint, until by the end of the second 
century almost all higher education was given in Greek, and Latin literature 
was swallowed up in the general Hellenic koine and culture of the age. 

The Roman equivalent of our college and university education was provided 
in the schools of the rhetors. The Empire bristled with rhetoricians who spoke 

* Toys and games were much as today. Roman children played hopscotch, tug-of-war, pitch 
and toss, blindman’s buff, hide-and-seek; and with dolls, hoops, skipping ropes, hobbyhorses, 
and kites. Roman youth played five distinguishable games of ball. One resembled our football, 
except that (or in that) it was played rather with arms and hands than with legs and feet.^S 



368 CAESAR AND CHRIST (cHAP. XVII 

for their clients in court, or wrote speeches for them, or gave public lectures, 
or taught their art to pupils, or did all four. Many of them traveled from city 
to city, speaking on literature, philosophy, or politics, and giving exhibitions of 
how to handle any subject with oratorical skill. The younger Pliny tells of the 
Greek Isaeus, then sixty-three years old: 

He proposes several questions for discussion, gives his audience 
liberty to call for any they please, and sometimes even to say what 
side of it he should defend; whereupon he rises, dons his gown, and 
begins. ... He introduces his theme with great propriety, his 
narrative is clear, his controversy ingenious, his logic forcible, and 
his rhetoric sublime.®^ 

Such men might open a school, employ assistants, and gather a large student 
body. Pupils entered about their sixteenth year, and paid fees as high as 2000 
sesterces per course. The chief subjects were oratory, geometry, astronomy, 
and philosophy— which included much that is now termed science. These con- 
stituted a “liberal education”— i.e., one designed for a well-to-do freeman {homo 
liber), who would presumably have no physical work to perform. Petronius 
complained, as every generation does, that education unfitted youth for the 
problems of maturity: “The schools are to blame for the gross foolishness of 
our young men, since in them they see or hear nothing at all of the affairs of 
everyday life.” We can only say that they gave the assiduous student that 
clarity and quickness of thought which have distinguished the legal profession 
in all ages, and that capacity for unscrupulous eloquence which marked the 
orators of Rome. Apparently no degrees were granted in these schools. The 
student might stay as long, and take as many courses, as he liked; Aulus Gellius 
remained till he was twenty-five. Women also attended, some after marriage. 
Those who wished further instruction went to Athens for philosophy at its 
bubbling source, to Alexandria for medicine, or to Rhodes for the last subtleties 
of rhetoric. Cicero spent ^4000 a year maintaining his son in the university of 
Athens. 

By Vespasian’s time the schools of rhetoric had so grown in number and 
influence that the wily Emperor thought it advisable to bring the more important 
ones in the capital under governmental control by paying their head professors 
a state salary— the highest being 100,000 sesterces (Sio,ooo) a year. We do not 
know to how many teachers or cities \’'espasian extended this subsidy. We hear 
of private endowments for higher education, such as the younger Pliny estab- 
lished at Comum.®^ Trajan provided scholarships for 5000 boys who had less 
money than brains. By the reign of Hadrian governmental financing of secondary 
schools had been adopted in many municipalities throughout the Empire, and 
a pension fund had been set aside for retired teachers. Hadrian and Antoninus 
exempted the leading professors of each city from taxation and other civic 
burdens. Education reached its height while superstition grew, morals declined, 
and literature decayed. 




Fig. 20— Portrait of a Yoimg Girl 
Museo delle Terme, Rome 





'* 1 


ViK' 

•.h' ■" ' 


.*’ 1 , ; 



;; • 4 ^ •-. 




Fig. 2i-“C/Yrie” 

British Museum 













Fig. z ^— ‘"Sappho” 
Museo Nazionale, Naples 



Fig. 26— The Colosseum 





CHAP. XVIl) 


EPICUREAN ROME 


369 


III. THE SEXES 

The moral life of youth was carefully guarded in the girl, leniently super- 
vised in the young man. The Roman, hke the Greek, readily condoned the 
resort of men to prostitutes. The profession was legalized and restricted; 
brothels (lupanaria) were by law kept outside the city walls and could open 
only at night; prostitutes (?neretrices) were registered by the aediles and 
were required to wear the toga instead of the stola. Some women enrolled as 
prostitutes to avoid the legal penalties of detected adultery. Fees were ad- 
justed to bring promiscuity within the reach of every pocketbook; we have 
heard of the “quarter-of-an-as woman.” But there was now a rising number 
of educated courtesans who sought to win patrons by poetry, singing, music, 
dancing, and cultured conversation. One did not have to go outside the 
walls to find these or other ladies of easy persuasion; Ovid assures us that 
they could be met under the porticoes, at the circus, in the theater, “as 
numerous as stars in the sky”;®^ and Juvenal found them in the precincts of 
temples, particularly that of Isis, a goddess lenient to love.®® Christian authors 
charged that prostitution was practiced within the cellas and between the 
altars of Roman temples.®® 

Male prostitutes were also available. Condemned by law, tolerated by 
custom, homosexualism flourished with Oriental abandon. “I am stricken 
with the heavy dart of love,” sings Horace— and for whom?— “for Lyciscus, 
who claims in tenderness to outdo any woman”; from this passion he can be 
freed “only by another flame for some fair maid or slender youth.” Mar- 
tial’s choicest epigrams turn upon pederasty; and one of Juvenal’s least 
publishable satires represents the complaint of a woman against this out- 
rageous competition.®® Erotic poetry of indifferent worth and gender, the 
Priapeia, circulated freely among sophisticated youths and immature adults. 

Marriage contended bravely with these rival outlets and, helped by anxious 
parents and matrimonial brokers, managed to find at least temporary hus- 
bands for nearly every girl. Unmarried women above nineteen were con- 
sidered “old maids,” but they were rare. The betrothed couple seldom saw 
each other; there was no courtship, not even a word for it; Seneca com- 
plained that everything else was tested before purchase, but not the bride 
by the groom.®® Sentimental attachment before marriage was uncommon; 
love poetry was addressed to married women or to women whom the poet 
never thought of marrying; and women’s escapades came after marriage, as 
under similar conditions in medieval and modem France. The elder Seneca 
assumed widespread adultery among Roman women,^® and his philosopher 



37 ° CAESAR AND CHRIST ( CHAP. XVII 

son thought that a married woman content with two lovers was a paragon 
of fideUty.^^ “Pure women,” sang the cynical Ovid, “are only those who have 
not been asked; and a man who is angry at his wife’s amours is a mere 
rustic.” These may be literary conceits; more rehable is the simple epitaph 
of Quintus Vespillo to his wife: “Seldom do marriages last without divorce 
until death; but ours continued happily for forty-one years.” Juvenal tells 
of a woman who married eight times in five years.^”* Having been wed for 
property or politics rather than for love, some women considered their duty 
fulfilled if they surrendered their dowries to their husbands and their per- 
sons to their lovers. “Did we not agree,” an adulteress in Juvenal explained to 
her unexpected husband, “that we should both do as we hked? ” The 
“emancipation” of women was as complete then as now, barring the formah- 
ties of the franchise and the letter of dead laws. Legislation kept women 
subject, custom made them free. 

In a number of cases emancipation, as in our time, meant industrialization. 
Some women worked in shops or factories, especially in the textile trades; 
some became lawyers and doctors;^® some became politically powerful; the 
wives of provincial governors reviewed and addressed troops.^'^ The Vestal 
Virgins secured political appointments for their friends, and the women of 
Pompeii announced their pohtical preferences on the walls. Conservatives 
moaned and gloated over the apparent fulfillment of Cato’s warning that if 
women achieved equahty they would rum it into mastery. Juvenal was 
horrified to find women actresses, athletes, gladiators, poets;^® Martial de- 
scribes them as fighting wild beasts, even lions, in the arena;^® Statius tells of 
women dying in such jousts.®® Ladies rode through the streets in sedan chairs, 
“exposing themselves on every side to the view”;®^ they conversed with men 
in porticoes, parks, gardens, and temple courts; they accompanied them to 
private or pubhc banquets, to the amphitheater and the theater, where “their 
bare shoulders,” said Ovid, “give you something charming to contem- 
plate.” ®^ It was a gay, colorful, multisexual society that would have aston- 
ished the Periclean Greeks. In the spring fashionable women filled the boats, 
shores, and villas of Baiae and other resorts with their laughter, their proud 
beauty, their amorous audacities, and pohtical intrigue. Old men denounced 
them longingly. 

Frivolous or immoral women were then, as now, a conspicuous minority. 
Quite as numerous— though not always distinct— were the ladies who fell in 
love with art, religion, or literature. Sulpicia’s verses were thought worthy 
of being handed down with those of Tibullus; they were highly erotic, but 
as they were addressed to her husband they were almost virtuous.®® Martial’s 
friend Theophila was a philosopher, a real expert on the Stoic and Epicurean 



EPICUREAN ROME 


CHAP. XVIl) 


371 


systems. Some women busied themselves in philanthropy and social service, 
gave temples, theaters, and porticoes to their towns, and contributed as 
patronesses to collegia. An inscription at Lanuvium speaks of a curia muli- 
enivi, “an assembly of women”; Rome had a conventus matronarum; 
perhaps Italy had a national federation of women’s clubs. In any case, after 
reading Martial and Juvenal, we are disconcerted to find so many good 
women in Rome. Octavia faithful to Antony through every betrayal, and 
rearing devotedly his exotic children; Antonia her loving daughter, the 
chaste widow of Drusus, and the perfect mother of Germanicus; Mallonia, 
who publicly reproved Tiberius for his wickedness and then killed herself; 
Arria Paeta, who, when Caecina Paetus was ordered by Claudius to die, 
plunged a dagger into her breast and, dying, handed the weapon to her 
husband with the assuring words, “It does not hurt”;®^ Paulina, who tried 
to die with Seneca; Politta, who, when Nero had her husband executed, 
began to starve herself, and, when the same sentence came to her father, 
joined him in suicide;®^ Epicharis, the freedwoman who suffered every tor- 
ture rather than betray the conspiracy of Piso; the unnumbered women who 
concealed and protected their husbands in the proscriptions, went with them 
into exile, or like Fannia, wife of Helvidius, defended them at great risk and 
cost: these alone would tip the scale against all the trollops of Martial’s 
epigrams and Juvenal’s stings. 

Behind such heroines were the nameless wives whose marital fidelity and 
maternal sacrifices sustained the whole structure of Roman life. The old 
Roman virtues— picto, gravitas, simplicitas—^t mutual devotion of parents 
and children, a sober sense of responsibility, an avoidance of extravagance 
or display— still survived in Roman homes. The refined and wholesome 
families described in Pliny’s letters did not suddenly begin with Nerva and 
Trajan; they had existed quietly through the age of the despots; they had 
survived the espionage of emperors, the debasement of a helpless populace, 
the vulgarity of the demimonde. We catch glimpses of such homes in the 
epitaphs of mate to mate and of parents to children. “Here,” reads one, “lie 
the bones of Urbilia, wife of Primus. She was dearer to me than life. She died 
at twenty-three, beloved of all. Farewell, my consolation!” And another: 
“To my dear wife, with whom I passed eighteen happy years. For love of her 
I have sworn never to remarry.” We can picture these women in their 
homes— spinning wool, scolding and educating their children, directing 
servants, carefully administering their modest funds, and sharing with their 
husbands in the immemorial worship of the household gods. Despite her 
immorahty it was Rome, not Greece, that raised the family to new heights 
in the ancient world. 



372 


CAESAR AND CHRIST 


(chap. XVII 


IV. DRESS 

If we may judge from a few hundred statues, the Roman males of Nero’s 
day were stouter and softer in figure and features than the men of the young 
Republic. World rule kept many of them characteristically hard and stern, 
fearful rather than lovable; but food and wine and sloth had rounded many 
others into shapes that would have scandalized the Scipios. They still shaved, 
or, more usually, were shaved by barbers {ton sores). A youth’s first shave was 
a holyday in his life; often he piously dedicated his original whiskers to a god.®'^ 
Common Romans continued the republican tradition and had their hair cut 
close, or even cropped, but an increasing number of dandies had theirs curled; 
Mark Antony and Domitian are so represented. Many men wore wigs, some had 
the semblance of hair painted on their pates.®® All classes, indoors and out, now 
dressed in a simple tunic or blouse; the toga was donned only for formal occa- 
sions, by clients at receptions and by patricians in the Senate or at the games. 
Caesar wore a purple toga as a sign of office; many dignitaries imitated him; but 
soon the purple robe became a prerogative of the emperors. There were no 
irksome trousers, no elusive buttons, no drooping hose; but in the second century 
men began to wrap their legs with fasciae, or bands. Footwear ranged from the 
sandal— a leather or cork sole attached Nipponwise by a thong between the big 
and second toes— to the high shoe of full leather, or of leather and cloth, usually 
worn with the toga in synthesis or full dress. 

Roman women of the early Empire, as seen in frescoes and statuary and on 
coins, were much like the women of the United States at the beginning of the 
twentieth century, except that they were nearly all brunette. Their figures were 
moderately slender, and their robes gave their carriage a hypnotic grace. They 
knew the value of sunshine, exercise, and fresh air; some brandished dumbbells, 
some swam assiduously, some dieted; others reined in their bosoms with stays.®® 
Feminine hair was usually combed back and bound in a knot behind the neck, 
often enclosed in a net, and tied with a band or ribbon over the head. Later 
fashions demanded a loftier coiffure, supported by wire and elaborated with a 
wig of blonde hair imported from German maids.®® A woman of fashion might 
occupy several slaves for hours in manicuring her nails and dressing her hair.®^ 

Cosmetics were as varied as today. Juvenal describes “beautification” as one 
of the most important technologies of the age; physicians, queens, and poets 
wrote volumes on the subject.®- A Roman lady’s boudoir was an arsenal of 
cosmetic instruments— Uveezers, scissors, razors, files, brushes, combs, strigils, 
hair nets, wigs— and jars or phials of perfumes, creams, oils, pastes, pumice stone, 
soaps. Depilatories were used to remove hair, scented ointments to wave it or 
fix it. Many women applied to their faces a nocturnal mask of dough and asses’ 
milk in a mixture concocted by Poppaea, who found it helpful in repairing a bad 
complexion; therefore asses followed her in all her travels; sometimes she took a 



EPICUREAN ROME 


CHAP. XVIl) 


373 


whole herd with her and bathed in asses’ milk.®* Faces were whitened or rouged 
with paint, brows and eyelashes were dyed black or painted over, sometimes the 
veins of the temple were traced with delicate lines of blue.®"* Juvenal complained 
that a rich woman “reeks of Poppaean ointments that stick to the lips of her 
unfortunate husband,” who never sees her face. Ovid found these arts disillusion- 
ing and advised the ladies to conceal them from their lovers— all but the combing 
of their hair, which entranced him.®® 

Delicate lingerie was now added to the simple feminine garments of pre- 
Hannibalic Rome. Scarfs fell over the shoulders, and veils made an alluring 
mystery of the face. In winter soft furs caressed affluent forms. Silk was so com- 
mon that men as well as women wore it. Silk and linen were colored with costly 
dyes; Romans often paid a thousand denarii for a pound of double-dyed Tyrian 
wool.®^ Embroideries of gold and silver thread decorated dresses, curtains, 
carpets, and coverlets. Women’s shoes were made of soft leather or cloth, 
sometimes elaborately cut into an openwork pattern; they might be trimmed 
with gold and beset with jewelry; ®® and high heels were often added to remedy 
the shortcomings of nature. 

Jewelry was an important part of a woman’s equipment. Rings, earrings, neck- 
laces, amulets, bracelets, breast chains, brooches, were necessities of life. Lollia 
Paulina once wore a dress covered from head to foot with emeralds and pearls, 
and carried with her the receipts showing that they cost 40,000,000 sesterces.®® 
Pliny describes over a hundred varieties of precious stones used in Rome. Expert 
imitations of these provided a busy industry; Roman “emeralds” of glass were 
superior to modem forgeries and were sold as genuine by jewelers as late as 
the nineteenth century.'^® Men as well as women were fond of large and con- 
spicuous stones. One senator had in his ring an opal as big as a filbert. Hearing 
of it, Antony had him proscribed; he escaped, carrying 2,000,000 sesterces on 
his finger; doubtless jewelry was then, as often, a hedge against inflation or 
revolution. Silver plate was now common in all but the lower classes. Tiberius 
and later emperors issued edicts against luxury, but these could not be enforced 
and were soon ignored. Tiberius yielded, and confessed that the extravagance of 
patricians and parvenus gave employment to the artisans of Rome and the East, 
and allowed provincial tribute to flow back from the capital. “Without luxury,” 
he said, “how could Rome, how could the provinces, live?” 

Roman dress was not more luxurious than that of modem women, and far less 
gorgeous and costly than the garb of medieval lords. Fashion did not change in 
Rome as rapidly as in modem cities; a good garment might be worn a lifetime 
and remain in style. But compared with the standards of the Republic before 
LucuUus and Pompey had brought in the loot and hedonism of the East, upper- 
class Rome was now an epicurean paradise of fine clothing, varied food, elegant 
furniture, and stately homes. Shorn of political leadership, almost of political 
power, the aristocracy retired from the curia to its palaces, and abandoned itself, 
with no morals but philosophy, to the pursuit of pleasure and the art of life. 



374 


CAESAR AND CHRIST 


(chap. XVU 


V. A ROMAN DAY 

The luxuries of the home far outran the luxuries of dress. Floors of 
marble and mosaic; columns of polychrome marble, alabaster, onyx; walls 
painted with brilliant murals or encrusted with costly stones; ceilings some- 
times coffered in gold or plate glass; tables with citrus wood standing on 
ivory legs; divans decorated with tortoise shell, ivory, silver, or gold; Alex- 
andrian brocades or Babylonian coverings for which common millionaires 
paid 800,000, Nero 4,000,000, sesterces;'^® beds of bronze fitted with mosquito 
netting; candelabra of bronze, marble, or glass; statues and paintings and 
objects of art; vases of Corinthian bronze or Murrhine glass— these were some 
of the ornaments that crowded the mansions of Nero’s age. 

In such a home the master fived as in a museum. Slaves had to be bought to 
guard this wealth, and others to guard these. Some houses had 400 of them, 
engaged in attendance, supervision, or industry; the life of the great man, 
even in the privacy of his rooms, was spent in the publicity of his slaves. 
To eat with a servant at each elbow, to undress with a slave at each boot, to 
relax with a menial at every door— this is not paradise. To assure the misery 
of wealth the great man began his day, about seven, by receiving his “clients” 
and parasites and offering his cheeks to their kisses. After two hours of this 
he might breakfast. Then he received and returned formal visits of his friends. 
Etiquette required that one must repay the calls of every friend, help him 
in lus lawsuits and candidacies, attend the betrothal of his daughter, the 
coming of age of his son, the reading of his poems, the signing of his will. 
These and other social obligations were performed with a grace and courtesy 
not exceeded in any civilization. Then the great man went to the Senate, or 
labored on some governmental commission, or attended to his personal 
affairs. 

For the man of modest means life was simpler, but not less arduous. After 
the social calls of the early morning he gave himself to his business till noon. 
Humble folk were at their work by sunrise; as there was little night life, the 
Roman took full advantage of the day. A light luncheon came at noon, din- 
ner at three or four— the higher the class, the later the hour. After luncheon 
and a siesta, the peasant and the employed proletaire returned to work till 
nearly sunset; others sought recreation outdoors or in the public baths. The 
Romans of the Empire took their bathing more religiously than their gods. 
Like the Japanese, they could bear public better than private smells, and no 
ancient people but the Egyptians rivaled them in cleanliness. They carried 
handkerchiefs (sudaria) to wipe away their sweat,’^^ and brushed their teeth 
with powders and paste. In the early Republic a bath every eighth day had 



EPICUREAN ROME 


CHAP. XVIl) 


375 


sufficed; now one had to bathe daily or risk a Martial’s epigram; even the 
rustic, says Galen, bathed every day.’^® Most homes had bathtubs, rich houses 
had bathroom suites sparkling with marble, glass, or silver fixtures and taps.'^® 
But the majority of free Romans relied on the public baths. 

Ordinarily these were privately owned. In 33 b.c. there were 170 in 
Rome; in the fourth century a.d. there were 856, besides 1352 public swim- 
ming pools.'^^ More popular than such establishments were the great baths 
built by the state, managed by concessionaires and staffed by hundreds of 
slaves. These ther?me— “hot [waters]”— erected by Agrippa, Nero, Titus, 
Trajan, Caracalla, Alexander Severus, Diocletian, and Constantine, were 
monuments of state-socialistic splendor. The Baths of Nero had 1600 marble 
seats and accommodated 1600 bathers at one time; the Baths of Caracalla 
and those of Diocletian accommodated 3000 each. Admission was open to 
any citizen for a quadrans ( i [4 cents) the government met the balance of 
the cost, and apparently oil and service were included in the fee. The baths 
were open from daybreak to one p.m. for women, from two to eight p.m. 
for men; but mixed bathing was allowed by most of the emperors. Normally 
the visitor went first to a dressing room to change his clothes; then to the 
palaestra to box, wrestle, run, jump, hurl the disk or the spear, or play ball. 
One ball game was like our “medicine ball”; in another two opposed groups 
scrambled for a ball, and carried it forward against each other with all the 
enterprise of a modem university.^® Sometimes professional ballplayers 
would come to the baths and give exhibitions.®® Oldsters who preferred to 
take their exercise by proxy went to massage rooms and had a slave rub away 
their fat. 

Passing to the baths proper, the citizen entered the tepidarium— in this 
case a warm-air room; thence he went on to the calidarium, or hot-air room; 
if he wished to perspire still more freely, he moved into the laconicum, and 
gasped in superheated steam. Then he took a warm bath and washed himself 
with a novelty learned from the Gauls— soap, made from tallow and the ashes 
of the beech or the elm.®^ These warm rooms were the most popular and 
gave the baths their Greek name; probably they were Rome’s attempt to 
forestall or mitigate rheumatism and arthritis.®® The bather progressed to the 
frigidarium and took a cold bath; he might also dip into the fischw, or swim- 
ming pool. Then he had himself rubbed with some oil or ointment, usually 
made from the olive; this was not washed off, but merely scraped off with a 
strigil and dried with a towel, so that some oil might be returned to the skin 
in place of that which the warm baths had removed. 

The bather.seldomJeft the thermae at this point. For these were clubhouses 
as well as baths; they provided rooms for games like dice and chess,®® galleries 



CAESAR AND CHRIST 


376 


(chap, xvh 


of painring and statuary, exedrae where friends might sit and converse, li- 
braries and reading rooms, and halls where a musician or a poet might give a 
recital or a philosopher might explain the world. In these afternoon hours 
after the bath Roman society found its chief meeting point; both sexes 
mingled freely in gay but polite association, flirtation, or discussion; there, 
and at the games and in the parks, the Romans could indulge their passion 
for talk, their fondness for gossip, and learn all the news and scandal of the 
day. 

If they wished they could have dinner in the restaurant at the baths, but 
most of them dined at home. Perhaps because of the lassitude caused by exer- 
cise and warm bathing, the custom was to recline at meals. Once the women 
had sat apart while the men reclined; now the women reclined beside the 
men. The triclinium, or dining room, was so named because it usually con- 
tained three couches, arranged in square-magnet form around a serving 
table. Each couch normally accommodated three persons. The diner rested 
his head on his left arm, and his arm on a cushion, while the body extended 
diagonally away from the serving table. 

The poorer classes continued to live chiefly on grains, dairy products, 
vegetables, fruits, and nuts. Pliny lists a wide assortment of vegetables in the 
Roman dietary, from garlic to rape. The well to do ate meat, with the usual 
superabundance of reckless carnivores. Pork was the favorite flesh food; 
Pliny praises the pig for furnishing fifty different dainties.®^ Pork sausages 
(botuli) were hawked through the streets in portable ovens, as on our high- 
ways today. 

When one dined at a banquet he expected rarer foods. The banquet began 
at four and lasted till late in the night or till the next day. The tables were 
strewn with flowers and parsley, the air was scented with exotic perfumes, 
the couches were soft with cushions, the seix^ants were stiff with livery. Be- 
tween the appetizer (giistatio) and the dessert {secimda viema, “second 
table”) came the luxury dishes on which the host and his chef prided them- 
selves. Rare' fish, rare birds, rare fruit, appealed to the curiosity as well as the 
palate. Mullets were bought at a thousand sesterces a pound; Asinius Celer 
paid 8000 for one; Juvenal growled that a fisherman cost less than a fish. As 
an added delight for the guests, the mullet might be brought in alive and 
boiled before their eyes, that they might enjoy the varied colors it took in 
the agony of death.®“ V’edius Pollio raised these sesquipedalian fish in a large 
tank and fed them wdth unsatisfactory slaves.®® Eels and snails were con- 
sidered dainties, but the law forbade the eating of dormice.®'^ The wings of 
ostriches, the tongues of flamingoes, the flesh of songbirds, the livers of geese, 
were favorite dishes. Apicius, a famous epicure under Tiberius, invented 



EPICUREAN ROME 


CHAP. XVIl) 


377 


the pate de jots gras by fattening the livers of sows with a diet of figs.®®* 
Custom allowed the diner to empty his stomach with an emetic after a heavy 
banquet. Some gluttons performed this operation during the meal and then 
returned to appease their hunger; vo?mint ut edant, edunt ut vomant, said 
Seneca— “they vomit to eat, and eat to vomit.” Such behavior was excep- 
tional, and no worse than the braggart drunkenness of American conven- 
tioneers. Pleasanter was the custom of presenting gifts to the guests, or let- 
ting flowers or perfumes fall upon them from the ceiling, or entertaining 
them with music, dancing, poetry, or drama. Conversation, loosened with 
wine and stimulated by the presence of the other sex, would conclude the 
evening. 

W e must not think of such banquets as the customary end of a Roman day, 
or as more frequent in a Roman’s hfe than the dinners-caw-oratory so popu- 
lar today. History, like the press, misrepresents life because it loves the ex- 
ceptional and shuns the newsless career of an honest man or the quiet routine 
of a normal day. Most Romans were like our neighbors and ourselves: they 
rose reluctantly, ate too much, worked too much, played too little, loved 
much, seldom hated, quarreled a bit, talked a great deal, dreamed waking 
dreams, and slept. 


VI. A ROMAN HOLIDAY 

1. The Stage 

Having many gods to worship, and many provinces to milk, Rome had 
many holidays, once solemn with religious pageantry, now gay with secular 
delight. In summer many of the poor fled from the humid heat to suburban 
or riverside taverns or groves, drinking, dining, dancing, and loving in the 
open air. Those who could afford it might go to the bathing resorts that lined 
the western coast, or sport with the rich on Baiae’s bay. In winter it was the 
ambition of every caste-conscious Roman to go south, if possible to Rhegium 
or Tarentum, and return with a coat of tan as a certificate of class. But those 
who stayed in Rome found entertainment plentiful and cheap. Recitations, 
lectures, concerts, mimes, plays, athletic contests, prize fights, horse races, 
chariot races, mortal combats of men with men or beasts, not-quite-sham 
naval battles on artificial lakes— never was a city more bountifully amused. 

In the early Empire there were in the Roman year seventy-six festival 
days on which ludi were performed. Of these, fifty-five were ludi scenici, 

• Apicius squandered a huge fortune in extravagant living; then, being reduced to to, 000,000 
sesterces ($1,500,000), he committed suicide.^® Two hundred years later a classic of gas- 
tronomy— De re coquinaria—wis attributed to him by a device permitted in antiquity. 



378 CAESAR AND CHRIST (cHAP. XVII 

devoted to plays or mimes; twenty-two were games in the circus, the 
stadium, or the amphitheater. The number of ludi increased until by a.d. 
354 they were presented on 175 days in the year.®”- This meant no growth 
in the Roman drama; on the contrary, the drama decayed while the stage 
prospered. Original dramas were now written to be read rather than played; 
the theater contented itself with old Roman and Greek tragedies, old Roman 
comedies, and mimes. Stars dominated the stage and made huge fortunes. 
Aesopus the tragedian, after a life of assiduous extravagance, left 20,000,- 
000 sesterces. Roscius the comic actor made 500,000 sesterces a year and 
became so rich that for several seasons he acted without pay— a scorn of 
money that made this ex-slave the lion of aristocratic gatherings. The games 
of the circus and the amphitheater absorbed the interest and coarsened the 
taste of the public, and the Roman drama died in the arena, another martyr 
to Roman holidays. 

Through emphasis on acting and scenery rather than plot or thought, the 
drama gradually yielded the stage to mimes and pantomimes. The mime 
contained little dialogue, chose its themes from lowly life, and relied on 
character sketches presented with skillful mimicry. Freedom of speech, hav- 
ing disappeared from the assemblies and the Forum, survived for a moment 
in these brief farces, when a mime would risk his head to earn applause by 
a double-entendre aimed at an emperor or his favorites. Caligula had an actor 
burned alive in the amphitheater for such an allusion.®^ On the day when 
the parsimonious Vespasian was buried a mime imitated the obsequies. 
During the procession the corpse sat up and asked how much this funeral 
was costing the state. “Ten million sesterces,” was the answer. “Give me 
100,000,” said the imperial cadaver, “and throw me into the Tiber.” The 
mime alone admitted women as actors; and as these were thereby auto- 
matically classed as prostitutes, they had nothing to lose by obscenity. On 
special occasions like the Flordia the audience called upon these performers 
to remove every garment.®* Both sexes attended these performances, as in 
our time. Cicero found brides there, and they found him. 

By suppressing speech altogether, and raising the theme to subjects from 
classic literature, the pantomime (“all mimicry”) was evolved out of the 
mime. There was a profit in foregoing language; the polyglot population 
of Rome, of which a considerable part could understand only the simplest 
Latin, followed the action better when unburdened with words. In 2 1 b.c. 
two actors, Pylades of Cihcia and Bathyllus of Alexandria, came to Rome 
and introduced the pantomime— already popular in the Hellenistic East— 
by performing one-act plays composed only of music, action, gesture, and 
dance. Tired of dramas in ancient and pompous verse, Rome welcomed the 
new art, thrilled to the grace and skill of the actors, enjoyed the gorgeousness 



EPICUREAN ROME 


CHAP. XVIl) 


379 


of their costumes, the splendor or humor of their masks, the trained and 
dieted perfection of their figures, the Oriental expressiveness of their hands, 
their quick and versatile impersonation of diverse characters, their sensuous 
enactment of erotic scenes. Audiences divided into frantic cliques and 
claques in support of rival favorites; women of high station fell in love with 
the actors, and pursued them with gifts and embraces, until one literally lost 
his head over Domitian’s wife. The pantomime gradually drove all rivals 
but the mime from the Roman stage. The drama succumbed to the ballet. 


2. Roman Music 

Such a triumph was made possible by the high development of music and 
the dance. Under the Republic dancing had been looked upon as disgraceful; 
the younger Scipio had compelled the closing of schools that taught music 
and dancing,®® and Cicero had remarked that “only a lunatic would dance 
when sober.” ®® But the pantomimes made dancing a fashion, then a passion; 
nearly every private home, says Seneca, had a dancing platform, echoing 
to the feet of men and women; rich households now had a dancing master, 
as well as a chef and a philosopher, as part of their equipment. As practiced 
in Rome the dance involved the rhythmical movement of the hands and the 
upper body even more than of legs and feet. Women cultivated the art not 
only for its own attractiveness, but because it gave them flexibility and grace. 

The Romans loved music only less than power, money, women, and blood. 
Like nearly everything else in Rome’s cultural life, her music came from 
Greece and had to fight its way against a conservatism that identified art 
with degeneration. In 1 1 5 b.c. the censors had forbidden the playing of any 
instrument except the short Italian flute. A century later the elder Seneca 
still considered music unmanly; but meanwhile Varro had devoted a book 
to De Musica, and this treatise, together with its Greek sources, became the 
support of many Roman works on musical theory.®^ Finally the rich and 
sensuous Greek modes and instruments won the day over Roman awkward- 
ness and simplicity, and music became a regular element in the education of 
women, and frequently of men. By a.d. 50 it had captured all classes and 
sexes; men as well as women spent whole days in hearing, composing, or 
singing airs; at last even emperors climbed and descended scales, and the 
philosophic Hadrian, as well as the effeminate Nero, was proud of his skill 
on the lyre. Lyric poetry was intended to be sung with music, and music 
was seldom composed except for poetry; ancient music was subordinated 
to the verse, whereas with us the music tends to overwhelm the words. 
Choral music was popular and was frequently heard at weddings, games. 



CAESAR AND CHRIST 


380 


(chap. XVII 


religious ceremonies, and funerals. Horace was deeply moved by the sight 
and sound of youths and maidens singing his carmen saeculare. In such 
choruses all the voices sang the same note, though in different octaves; part 
singing was apparently unknown. 

The basic instruments were the flute and the lyre. Our wind and string 
orchestras are still variations of these forms: the most heroic symphony is 
a judicious combination of puffing, plucking, scraping, and beating. The 
flute accompanied drama and was supposed to arouse emotion; tbe lyre 
attended song and was expected to elevate the soul. The flute, was long, had 
many openings, and a greater range of expression than the modern instru- 
ment. The lyre and the cithara were like our harp, but took a greater variety 
of shapes. Among the Greeks they had been of modest size, but the Romans 
magnified them until Ammianus described citharas “as large as carriages”; 
in general the Roman instruments, like ours, improved upon earlier ones 
chiefly in sonorousness and size. The strings of tbe lyre were made of gut 
or sinew and numbered up to eighteen; they were plucked with a plectrum 
or with the fingers— which alone could execute the quicker runs. From 
Alexandria, early in the first century, came the hydraulic organ, with several 
registers, stops, and orders of pipes. Nero fell in love with it, and the calm 
Quintilian was impressed by its versatility and power. 

Formal concerts were given, and musical contests played a part in some 
public games. Even modest dinners required a bit of music; Martial promises 
his guest at least a flute player;*® as for Trimalchio’s feast, the tables are 
wiped in rhythm with song. Caligula had an orchestra and a chorus on his 
pleasure boat. At the pantomimes sympbomae were performed— i.e., a chorus 
sang and danced to the accompaniment of an orchestra. Sometimes the actor 
would sing the solo parts, sometimes a professional singer {cantor') sang the 
words while the actor gestured or danced. It was not unheard of for a panto- 
mime to be accompanied by 3000 singers and 3000 dancers.^®® The orchestra 
was led by flutes, aided by lyres, cymbals, pipes, trumpets, “syringes,” and 
scabella— boards fastened to the players’ feet and capable of producing a 
pandemonium even more frightful than that of a modern orchestra at the 
height of its powers. Seneca mentions harmony in the playing of indi- 
viduals,^®^ but there is no sign that ancient orchestras used harmony con- 
trapuntally. The accompaniment was usually on a higher note than the 
song, but it did not, so far as we know, pursue a distinct sequence. 

Virtuosi were plentiful and minor performers abounded. Talent con- 
verged from all provinces upon the center of the world’s gold, while the 
institution of slavery permitted the training of choruses and orchestras on a 
large but inexpensive scale. Many rich establishments had their own musi- 
cians, and sent the most promising to famous teachers for advanced instruc- 



EPICUREAN ROME 


CHAP. XVIl) 


381 


tion. Some became citharoedi and gave concerts in which they sang and 
played the lyre; some specialized in singing, usually composing their own 
songs; some gave concerts on the organ or the flute like Cannus, who boasted, 
in the style of Beethoven, that his music could alleviate sorrow, increase 
joy, elevate piety, and fan the flame of love.^®^ These professionals went on 
extended concert tours throughout the Empire, earning plaudits, fees, pubUc 
monuments, and infatuations; some, says Juvenal, sold their love for an 
added honorarium.^®® Women fought for the plectra with which famous 
players had touched the strings, and offered sacrifice at the altars for the 
victory of their musical favorites in the Neronian and Capitohne games. 
We can faintly picture the imposing scene when musicians and poets from 
all the realm competed before great throngs, and the breathless winners re- 
ceived the crown of oak leaves from the emperor’s hands. 

We do not know enough of Roman music to describe its quality. Ap- 
parently it was louder, fuller, wilder than the Greek; a weird Oriental 
quality had entered it from Egypt, Asia Minor, and Syria. Old men mourned 
that recent composers were abandoning the restraint and dignity of the 
classic style, and were disordering the soul and nerves of youth with extrava- 
gant airs and noisy instruments. Certainly no people ever loved music more. 
The songs of the stage were caught up by a lively and volatile populace and 
rang through the streets and windows of Rome; the complex airs of the 
pantomimes were so fondly remembered that devotees could tell from 
the first notes of a strain to what play and scene it belonged. Rome made 
no real contribution to music, except perhaps through the better organiza- 
tion of performers into larger groups. But it honored music with exuberant 
usage and resilient response; it gathered the musical heritage of the ancient 
world into its temples, theaters, and homes; and when it passed it left to the 
Church the instruments and elements of the music that moves and deepens 
us today. 


3. The Games 

Now that war seemed banished, the great games were the most exciting 
event of the Roman year. They took place chiefly in celebration of religious 
festivals— of the Great Mother, of Ceres, of Flora, of Apollo, of Augustus; 
they might be the “Plebeian Games” to appease the plebs, or “Roman 
Games” in honor of the city and its goddess Roma; they might be offered 
in connection with triumphs, candidacies, elections, or imperial birthdays; 
they might, like the ludi saeculares, commemorate some cycle in Roman 
history. Like the games of Achilles in honor of Patroclus, those of Italy 
had originally been offered as a sacrifice to dead men. At the funeral of 



382 CAESAR AND CHRIST (cHAP. XVH 

Brutus Pera in 264 b.c. his sons gave a “spectacle” of three duels; at the 
funeral of Marcus Lepidus in 2 1 6 b.c. twenty-two combats were fought; and 
in 174 B.c. Titus Flaminius celebrated his father’s death with gladiatorial 
games in which seventy-four men fought. 

The simplest public games were athletic contests, usually held in a stadium. 
The performers, mostly professionals and ahens, ran foot races, threw the 
discus, wrestled, and boxed. The Roman public, accustomed to sanguinary 
gladiatorial exhibitions, only mildly favored athletics, but relished the prize 
fights in which massive Greeks fought almost to the death with gloves re- 
inforced at the knuckles with an iron band three quarters of an inch thick. 
The gentle Virgil describes a milder pugilistic feast in almost modem terms: 

Then the son of Anchises brought out hide gloves of equal weight, 
and bound the hands of the antagonists. . . . Each took his stand, 
poised on tiptoe and raising one arm. . . . Drawing their heads back 
from the blows they spar, hand against hand. They aim many hard 
blows, wildly pummeling each other’s sides and chests, ears and brows 
and cheeks, making the air resound with their strokes. . . . Entellus 
puts forth his right; Dares slips aside in a nimble dodge. . . . Entellus 
furiously drives Dares headlong over the arena, redoubling his blows, 
now with the right hand, now with the left. . . . Then Aeneas put 
an end to the fray. Dares’ mates led him to the ships with his knees 
shaking, his head swaying from side to side, his mouth spitting teeth 
and blood.^®^ 

Still more exciting were the races at the Circus Maximus. On two suc- 
cessive days forty-four races were mn, some of horses and jockeys, some of 
light two- wheeled chariots drawn by two, three, or four horses abreast. The 
cost was met by rival stables owned by rich men; the jockeys, drivers, and 
chariots of each stable were costumed or painted in distinctive colors- 
white, green, red, or blue; and all Rome, as the time for these contests ap- 
proached, divided into factions named from these colors, and particularly 
the red and the green. At home, in school, at lectures, in the forums, half 
the talk was about favorite jockeys and charioteers; their pictures were 
everywhere, their victories were announced in the Acta Dhima; some of 
them made great fortunes, some had statues raised to them in public squares. 
On the appointed day 1 80,000 men and women moved in festive colors to 
the enormous hippodrome. Enthusiasm rose to a mania. Excited partisans 
smelled the dung of the animals to assure themselves that the horses of their 
favorite drivers had been properly fed.^®® The spectators passed by the shops 
and brothels that lined the outer walls; they filed through hundreds of en- 
trances and sorted themselves with the sweat of anxiety into the great horse- 
shoe of seats. Vendors sold them cushions, for the seats were mostly of hard 



EPICUREAN ROME 


CHAP. XVIl) 


383 


wood, and the program would last all day. Senators and other dignitaries 
had special seats of marble, ornamented with bronze. Behind the imperial 
box was a suite of luxurious rooms, where the emperor and his family might 
eat, drink, rest, bathe, and sleep. Gambling was feverish, and fortunes passed 
from hand to hand as the day advanced. From openings under the stands 
emerged the horses, the jockeys and drivers, and the chariots; and each 
faction shook the stands with applause as its favorite color appeared. The 
charioteers, mostly slaves, wore bright tunics and shining helmets; in one 
hand was a whip, and in their belts a knife to cut, in accident, the traces 
tied to their waists. Along the middle of the elliptical arena ran the spina 
(“thorn,” “spine”), an island a thousand feet long, adorned with statues 
and obelisks; at one end were the metae (“measures”), circular pillars that 
served as goals. The usual length of a chariot race was seven circuits, about 
five miles. The test of skill lay in making the turns at the goals as swiftly 
and sharply as safety would allow; collisions were frequent there, and men, 
chariots, and animals mingled in fascinating tragedy. As the horses or 
chariots clattered to the final post the hypnotized audience rose like a swell- 
ing sea, gesticulated, waved handkerchiefs, shouted and prayed, groaned 
and cursed, or exulted in almost supernatural ecstasy. The applause that 
greeted the winner could be heard far beyond the limits of the city. 

The most stupendous of all the spectacles offered at Roman celebrations 
was the sham naval battle. The first large nawmchia was given by Caesar 
in a basin excavated for the purpose on the outskirts of the city. Augustus 
marked the dedication of his temple to Mars the Avenger by presenting 
3000 fighters in a replica of the battle of Salamis on an artificial lake 1800 
by 1200 feet. Claudius, as already noted, celebrated the completion of the 
Fucine tunnel with a conflict of triremes and quadriremes involving 19,000 
men. They fought with a disappointing courtesy, and soldiers had to be 
sent among them to ensure a proper shedding of blood.^®® At the dedication 
of the Colosseum Titus had its arena flooded, and reproduced that battle of 
the Corinthians and Corcyreans which had brought on the Peloponnesian 
War. The combatants in these engagements were war captives or con- 
demned criminals. They butchered one another until one side or the other 
was killed off; the victors, if they had cut bravely, might be granted freedom. 

The games reached their climax in the contests of animals and gladiators 
in the amphitheater— after Vespasian, in the Colosseum. The arena was an 
immense wooden floor strewn with sand; parts of this floor could be lowered 
and then quickly raised with a change of scene; and at brief notice the whole 
floor could be covered with water. Large chambers beneath it held the 
animals, machines, and men scheduled for the program of the day. Just above 



384 CAESAR AND CHRIST (CHAP. XVII 

the arena’s guard wall was a podium or marble terrace on whose ornate seats 
sat senators, priests, and high officials; above this was the suggestum, a high 
loge where the empeior and empress sat on thrones of ivory and gold, sur- 
rounded by their family and retinue. Behind this aristocratic circle sat the 
equestrian order, in twenty tiers of seats. A lofty intervening wall, decorated 
with statuary, separated the upper orders from the lower classes in the 
stands above. Any free person, male or female, could come, and apparently 
no admission was charged. The crowd took advantage of the emperor’s 
presence, here and at the circus, to shout its wishes to him— for the pardon 
of a prisoner or a fallen fighter, the emancipation of a courageous slave, the 
appearance of favorite gladiators, or some minor reform. From the topmost 
wall awnings could be unrolled to the arena railing to shade such parts of 
the assemblage as might suffer from the sun. Here and there fountains 
threw up jets of scented water to cool the air. When noon came most of 
the spectators hurried below to eat lunch; concessionaires were on hand to 
sell them food and sweets and drinks. On occasion the entire multitude might 
be fed by the order and bounty of the emperor, or dainties and presents 
might be scattered among the scrambling crowd. If, as sometimes occurred, 
contests were presented at night, a circle of lights could be lowered over 
the arena and the spectators. Bands of musicians performed in the interludes 
and accompanied the crises of the combats with exciting crescendo strains. 

The simplest event in the amphitheater was an exhibition of exotic animals. 
Gathered from all the knovra world, elephants, lions, tigers, crocodiles, 
hippopotami, lynxes, apes, panthers, bears, boars, wolves, giraffes, ostriches, 
stags, leopards, antelopes, and rare birds were kept in the zoological gardens 
of emperors and rich men, and were trained to skillful exploits or merry 
pranks; apes were taught to ride dogs, drive chariots, or act in plays; h ulls 
let boys dance on their backs; sea lions were conditioned to bark in answer 
to their individual names; elephants danced to cymbals struck by other 
elephants, or they walked a rope, or sat down to table, or wrote Greek 
or Latin letters. Animals might be merely paraded in bright or humorous 
costumes; usually, however, they were made to fight one another, or with 
men, or they were hunted to death with arrows and javelins. In one day, 
under Nero, 400 tigers fought with bulls and elephants; on another day, 
under Cahgula, 400 bears were slain; at the dedication of the Colosseum 
5000 animals died.^®^ If the animals wished to compromise they were stung 
to combat by lashes, darts, and hot irons. Claudius made a division of the 
Praetorian Guard fight panthers; Nero made them fight 400 bears and 
300 lions.^®® 

Combats of a bull with a man, long popular in Crete and Thessaly, were 



EPICUREAN ROME 


CHAP. XVH) 


385 


introduced into Rome by Caesar and were a frequent spectacle in the 
amphitheater.^®^ Condemned criminals, sometimes dressed in skins to re- 
semble animals, were thrown to beasts made ravenous for the occasion; 
death in such cases came with ail possible agony, and wounds were so deep 
that physicians used such men to study internal anatomy. All the world 
knows the story of Androcles, the runaway slave; captured, he was flung 
into the arena with a lion; but this lion, we are told, remembered that 
Androcles had once drawn a thorn from its paw, and refused to injure him. 
Androcles was pardoned, and made a living by exhibiting his civilized lion 
in tavems.^^® The condemned man was sometimes required to play in no 
make-believe way some famous tragic role; he might represent Medea’s 
rival, and be garbed in a handsome robe that would suddenly burst into 
flame and consume him; he might be burned to death on a pyre as Heracles; 
he might (if we may believe Tertullian) be publicly castrated as Atys; he 
might play Mucius Scaevola and hold his hand over burning coals until it 
was shriveled up; he might be Icarus and fall from the sky into no merciful 
ocean but a crojvd of wild beasts; he might be Pasiphae, and bear the 
embraces of a bull. One victim was dressed as Orpheus; he was sent with 
his lyre into an arena set as a pleasant grove of trees and brooks; suddenly 
hungry animals emerged from recesses and tore him to pieces.”^ Laureolus, 
a robber, was crucified in the arena for the amusement of the populace; bur 
as he took too long in dying, a bear was brought in and was persuaded to 
eat him, piece by piece, as he hung upon the cross. Martial describes the 
spectacle with fascination and approval.^^^ 

The supreme events were the combats of armed men, in duels or en masse. 
The contestants were war captives, condemned criminals, or disobedient 
slaves. The right of victors to slaughter their prisoners was generally ac- 
cepted throughout antiquity, and the Romans thought themselves generous 
in giving captives a chance for their lives in the arena. Men convicted of 
capital crimes were brought to Rome from all parts of the Empire, were 
sent to gladiatorial schools, and soon appeared in the games. If they fought 
with exceptional bravery they might win immediate freedom; if they merely 
survived they had to fight again and again as hohdays recurred; if they 
lasted three years they were released into slavery; if then they satisfied their 
masters for two years they were freed. Crimes entailing condemnation to 
a gladiatorial career were limited to murder, robbery, arson, sacrilege, and 
mutiny, but sedulous governors responsive to imperial needs might override 
these restrictions if the arena ran short of men.^^® Even knights and senators 
might be sentenced to fight as gladiators, and sometimes a passion for ap- 
plause led members of the equestrian order to offer themselves as volunteers. 



386 CAESAR AND CHRIST ( CHAP. XVII 

Not a few men, under the lure of adventure and danger, enlisted in the 
gladiatorial schools. 

Such schools had existed in Rome as early as 105 b.c. Under the Empire 
there were four of them there, several more in Italy, and one in Alexandria. 
Rich men, in Caesar’s day, had their own schools for preparing slaves to be 
gladiators. They used the graduates as bodyguards in peace and as aides in 
war, hired them out to fight at private banquets, and lent them to the games. 
On entering a professional gladiatorial school many a novice took an oath 
“to suffer himself to be whipped with rods, burned with fire, and killed 
with steel.” Training and discipline were rigorous; diet was supervised 
by physicians, who prescribed barley to develop muscle; violation of rules 
was punished by scourging, branding, and confinement in chains. Not all 
of these candidates for death were discontented with their lot. Some were 
elated with victories and thought of their prowess rather than their peril; 
some complained that they were not allowed to fight often enough; 
such men hated Tiberius for giving so few games. They had the stimulus and 
consolation of fame; their names were daubed by admirers upon pubhc 
walls; women fell in love with them, poets sang of them, painters portrayed 
them, sculptors carved for posterity their iron biceps and terrifying frowns. 
Many, however, were despondent at their imprisonment, their brutalizing 
routine, and their brief expectation of life. Several committed suicide; one 
by stuffing his throat with a sponge used to clean privies, another by insert- 
ing his head between the spokes of a moving wheel, several by hara- kir i 
in the arena.^^® 

On the eve of their combat they were given a rich banquet. The rougher 
ones ate and drank heartily; others took sad leave of their wives and chil- 
dren; those who were Christians joined in a last agape, or “supper of love.” 
The next morning they entered the arena in festal dress and paraded from 
one end of it to the other. They were usually armed with swords, or spears, 
or knives, and armored with bronze helmets, shields, shoulderplates, breast- 
plates, and greaves. They were classified according to their weapons: 
retiarii, who entangled their opponents with nets and dispatched them with 
daggers; secutores, skilled in pursuit with shield and sword; laqueatores, 
slingshooters; dirmchae, with a short sword in each hand; essedarii, who 
fought in chariots; bestiarii, who contended with beasts. Besides these enter- 
prises the gladiators engaged in duels, in pairs or in groups. If a dueler in a 
single combat was seriously wounded, the provider of the games asked the 
spectators for their will; they held thumbs up— or waved handkerchiefs— as 
signs of mercy, or turned thumbs down (pollice verso) to signify that the 
victor was to kill the defeated forthwith.^^^ Any combatant who betrayed a 
reluctance to die aroused the resentment of the people and was prodded to 



EPICUREAN ROME 


CHAP. XVIl) 


387 


bravery by hot irons.^^® Richer slaughter was furnished by mass battles in 
which thousands of men fought with desperate ferocity. In the eight 
spectacles given by Augustus 10,000 men took part in such wholesale con- 
flicts. Attendants in the garb of Charon probed the fallen with sharp rods 
to see if they were feigning death, and killed such actors with mallet blows 
on the head. Other attendants, dressed like Mercury, dragged the bodies 
away with hooks, while Moorish slaves gathered up the bloodied ground in 
shovels and spread fresh sand for the next death. 


Most Romans defended the gladiatorial games on the ground that the 
victims had been condemned to death for serious crimes, that the sufferings 
they endured acted as a deterrent to others, that the courage with which 
the doomed men were trained to face wounds and death inspired the people 
to Spartan virtues, and that the frequent sight of blood and battle accustomed 
Romans to the demands and sacrifices of war. Juvenal, who denounced 
everything else, left the games unscathed; the younger Phny, a highly civil- 
ized man,' praised Trajan for providing spectacles that impel men “to noble 
wounds and the scorn of death”; and Tacitus reflected that the blood 
spilled in the arena was in any case vile sanguis— the: “cheap gore” of com- 
mon men.^^® Cicero was revolted by the slaughter; “what entertainment,” 
he asks, “can possibly arise, to a refined and humanized spirit, from seeing a 
noble beast struck to the heart by its merciless hunter, or one of our own 
weak species cruelly mangled by an animal of far greater strength?” But, 
he added, “when guilty men are compelled to fight, no better discipline 
against suffering and death can be presented to the eye.” Seneca, drop- 
ping in at the games during the noon recess, when most of the assemblage 
had left for luncheon, was shocked to see hundreds of criminals driven into 
the arena to amuse the remaining audience with their blood. 

I come home more greedy, more cruel and inhuman, because I have 
been among human beings. By chance I attended a midday exhibi- 
tion, expecting some fun, wit, and relaxation . . . whereby men’s 
eyes may have respite from the slaughter of their fellow men. But 
it was quite the contrary. . . . These noon fighters are sent out with 
no armor of any kind; they are exposed to blows at all points, and 
no one ever strikes in vain. ... In the morning they throw men to 
the lions; at noon they throw them to the spectators. The crowd 
demands that the victor who has slain his opponent shall face the 
man who will slay him in turn; and the last conqueror is reserved for 
another butchering. . . . This sort of thing goes on while the stands 
are nearly em.pty. . . . Man, a sacred thing to man, is killed for 
sport and merriment.^-^ 



388 


CAESAR AND CHRIST 


(chap. XVII 


VII. THE NEW FAITHS 

Religion accepted the games as proper forms of religious celebration and 
inaugurated them with solemn processions. The Vestal Virgins and the 
priests occupied seats of honor in the theaters, at the circus, and before the 
arena. The emperor who presided was the high priest of the state religion. 

Augustus and his successors had done everything they could to revitalize 
the old faith, except to live moral lives; even the declared atheists among 
them, like Caligula and Nero, had carried out all the ritual traditionally due 
the official gods. The Luperci priests still danced through the streets on 
their festival day; the Arval Brethren still mumbled prayers to Mars in old 
Latin that no one could understand. Divination and augury were assidu- 
ously practiced and widely trusted; all but a few philosophers believed in 
astrology, and the emperors who banished astrologers consulted them. 
Magic and sorcery, witchcraft and superstition, charms and incantations, 
“portents” and the interpretation of dreams were deeply woven into the 
tissue of Roman life. Augustus studied his dreams with the diligence of a 
modern psychologist; Seneca saw women sitting on the steps of the Capitol 
waiting the pleasure of Jupiter because their dreams had told them they 
were desired of the god.^^® Every consul celebrated his inauguration by 
sacrificing steers; Juvenal, who could laugh at everything else, piously slit 
the throats of two lambs and a young ox in gratitude for the safe voyage 
of a friend. Temples were rich with gold and silver offerings; candles burned 
before the altars; the lips, hands, and feet of divine images were worn by the 
kisses of the devout. The old religion seemed still vigorous; it created new 
gods like Annona (gatherer of the world’s com for Rome), put new life 
into the worship of Fortuna and Roma, and gave powerful support to law, 
order, and tyranny. If Augusms had returned a year after his death he 
might well have claimed that his religious revival had proved a happy 
success. 

Despite these appearances the ancient faith was diseased at the bottom 
and at the top. The deification of the emperors revealed not how much the 
upper classes thought of their rulers, but how little they thouq-ht of their 
gods. Among educated men philosophy was whittling away belief even 
while patronizing it. Lucretius had not been without effect; men did not 
mention him, but merely because it was easier to practice epicureanism 
than to study Epicurus or his passionate expositor. The rich youths who 
went to Athens, Alexandria, and Rhodes for higher education found no 
sustenance there for the Roman creed. Greek poets made fun of the Roman 
pantheon, and Roman poets leaped to imitate them. The poems of Ovid 



EPICUREAN ROME 


CHAP. XVIl) 


389 


assumed that the gods were fables; the epigrams of Martial assumed that 
they were jokes; and no one seems to have complained. Many of the mimes 
ridiculed the gods; one whipped Diana off the stage, another showed Jove 
making his will in expectation of death. Juvenal, like Plato five centuries 
before him and ourselves eighteen centuries after him, noted that the fear 
of a watchful deity had lost its power to discourage perjury.^"® Even on the 
tombstones of the poor we note increasing skepticism, and some candid 
sensuality. Non jut, jut, non sum, non euro, reads one— “I was not, I was, 
I am not, I care not”; and another. Non jueram, non sum, nescio—'l had 
not been, I am not, I know not”; and another, “What I have eaten and drunk 
is my own; I have had my life.” “I believe in nothing beyond the grave,” 
says one tombstone; “There is no Hades, no Charon, no Cerberus,” asserts 
another. “Now,” a harassed soul wrote, “I need never fear hunger, need 
never pay rent, and am at least free from gout”; and a somber Lucretian 
writes of the buried flesh; “The elements out of which he was formed take 
possession of their own again. Life is only lent to man; he cannot keep it 
forever. By his death he pays his debt to Nature.” 

But doubt, however honest, cannot long take the place of belief. Amid 
all its pleasures this society had not found happiness. Its refinements wearied 
it, its debaucheries exhausted it; rich and poor were still subject to pain 
and grief and death. Philosophy— least of all so coldly superior a doctrine as 
Stoicism— could never give the common man a faith to grace his poverty, 
encourage his decency, solace his sorrows, and inspire his hopes. The old 
religion had fulfilled the first of these functions; it had failed in the rest. 
Men wanted revelation, and it gave them ritual; they wanted immortality, 
and it gave them games. Men who had come, enslaved or free, from other 
states felt excluded from this nationalistic worship; therefore they brought 
their own gods with them, built their own temples, practiced their own 
rites; in the very heart of the West they planted the religions of the Easl^ 
Between the creeds of the conquerors and the faith of the defeated a war 
took form in which the weapons of the legions were useless; the needs of 
the heart would determine the victory. 

The new deities came with war captives, returning soldiers, and mer- 
chants. Traders from Asia and Egypt set up temples in Puteoli, Ostia, and 
Rome for the cult of their traditional gods. The Roman government treated 
these alien faiths for the most part with toleration; since it would not admit 
foreigners to its own worship it preferred that they should practice their 
imported rites rather than have no religion at all. In return it required that 
each new faith should exercise a similar tolerance towards other creeds, 
and should include in its ritual some obeisance to the emperor’s “genius” 
and the goddess Roma, as an expression of loyalty to the state. Encouraged 



390 CAESAR AND CHRIST (CHAP. XVn 

by this lenience, the Oriental faiths already domiciled in Rome became 
major religions of the populace. Hoping to civilize the cult, Claudius re- 
moved the restrictions that had harassed the worship of the Great Mother; 
he allowed Romans to become her ministrants, and established her feast 
around the vernal equinox, from March 15 to 27. Her chief rival in this 
first Christian century was Isis, the Egyptian goddess of motherhood, fer- 
tility, and trade. Again and again the government had forbidden the cult in 
Rome, but it always returned; the piety of the devotees overcame the 
power of the state, and Caligula marked the surrender by building with 
public funds an immense shrine to her in the Field of Mars. Otho and Domi- 
tian took part in the Isiac festivals; Commodus, with shaven head, walked 
humbly behind the priests, holding reverently in his arms a statue of Anubis, 
the Egyptian monkey god. 

The divine invasion swelled from year to year. From southern Italy came 
the worship of Pythagoras— vegetarianism and reincarnation. From Hierap- 
olis came Atargatis, known to the Romans as dea Syria, “the Syrian goddess,” 
Aziz the “Zeus of Doliche,” and other strange gods; their worship was 
spread by Syrian merchants and slaves; and at last a young priest of a Syrian 
Baal ascended the throne as Elagabalus— worshiper of the god of the sun. 
From hostile Parthia came the cult of another sun-god, Mithras; its devotees 
were enlisted as soldiers in the great cosmic war of Light against Darkness, 
of Good against Evil; it was a virile faith that won men rather than women, 
and pleased the Roman legions stationed on distant frontiers where they 
could hardly hear the voices of their native gods. From Judea came Yahweh, 
an uncompromising monotheist who commanded the most difficult life of 
piety and regulation, but gave his followers a moral code and courage that 
supported them well in tribulation, and clothed with a certain nobility the 
life of the humblest poor. Among the Roman Jews who prayed to him were 
some, as yet obscurely distinguished from the rest, who worshiped his 
incarnate and resurrected son. 



CHAPTER XVIII 


Roman Law* 

146 B.C.-A.D. 192 


I. THE GREAT JURISTS 

1 AW was the most characteristic and lasting expression of the Roman 
J spirit. As Greece stands in history for freedom, so Rome stands for 
order; and as Greece bequeathed democracy and philosophy as the founda- 
tions of individual liberty, so Rome has left us its laws, and its traditions of 
administration, as the bases of social order. To unite these diverse legacies, 
to attune their stimulating opposition into harmony, is the elemental task 
of statesmanship. 

Since law is the essence of Roman history it has been impossible to keep 
them-separate, and this chapter can only be a structural and synoptic sup- 
plement to preceding and subsequent details. The Roman constitution was 
like the British— no set of permanently binding rules, but a stream of prece- 
dent giving direction without preventing change. As wealth increased, 
and life became more complex, new legislation issued from assemblies. 
Senate, magistrates, and princes; the body of the law grew as rapidly as the 
Empire and reached out to ever new frontiers. The education of lawyers, 
the guidance of judges, and the protection of the citizen from illegal judg- 
ments demanded the organization and formulation of the law into some 
orderly and accessible form. Amid the turmoil of the Gracchan and Marian 
revolution Publius Mucius Scaevola (consul, 133 b.c.) and his son Quintus 
(consul, 95 B.c.) labored to reduce the laws of Rom,e to an intelligible 
system. Cicero, pupil of another Quintus Mucius Scaevola (consul, 117 
B.C.), wrote eloquently on the philosophy of law, and constructed an ideal 
code designed to preserve the fortune that he had gained and the faith that 
he had lost. The contradictory enactments of Marius and Sulla, the un- 
precedented powers of Pompey, the revolutionary legislation of Caesar, and 
the new constitution of Augustus created fresh problems for minds that 
struggled to make a logic of the law; and the brilliant jurist Antistius Labeo 
confounded confusion by declaring the decrees of Caesar and Augustus 

* This chapter will be of no use to lawyers, and of no interest to others. 

391 



392 CAESAR AND CHRIST (cHAP. XVIII 

void, as the expression of usurped and illegal authority. Not till the Princi- 
pate had established itself, first by the use of force and then by the force 
of use, could the new legislation win acceptance in the minds of men as 
well as in the courts of power. To the second and third centuries of our 
era belongs the honor of giving Roman law its final formulation in the 
West— an achievement comparable to the formulation of science and philos- 
ophy in Greece. 

Here, too, Caesar had set the goal; but the actual work did not begin till 
Hadrian (a.d. i 17). This best educated of the emperors gathered about him 
a corps of jurists as his Privy Council, and commissioned them to replace 
the variable annual edicts of the praetors with a Perpetual Edict to be 
observed by all future judges in Italy. The Greeks had produced since Solon 
no masterpiece of jurisprudence, and never a codified system of law; but 
the Greek cities of Asia and Italy had developed excellent municipal codes. 
The much-traveled Hadrian knew these cities well and was perhaps inspired 
by their constitutions to improve and co-ordinate the laws of Rome. Under 
his successors, the Antonines, the work of codification continued, and the 
half-official repute enjoyed by the Stoic philosophy permitted a profound 
Greek influence upon Roman law. The Stoics declared that law should ac- 
cord with morality, and that guilt lay in the intention of the deed, not in the 
results. Antoninus, a product of the Stoic school, decreed that cases of doubt 
should be resolved in favor of the accused, and that a man should be held 
innocent until proved guilty two supreme principles of civilized law. 

Favored by imperial patronage, the science of jurisprudence nurtured a 
succession of geniuses. Salvius Julianus, a Roman of African birth, showed 
so much learning and industry as quaestor Augiisti, or legal adviser to the 
emperor, that the Senate voted him double the usual salary of that office. 
His response were acclaimed for their logic and clarity; his Digesta pre- 
sented a systematic arrangement of civil and praetorian law; it was he who, 
as the leading member of Hadrian’s Council, formulated the Praetorian 
Perpetual Edict. Another jurist is known to us only by his first name. Gains; 
his famous Institutiones was discovered by Niebuhr in 1816 on a faded 
palimpsest overwritten with some essays by Saint Jerome; it is now our fullest 
authority for pre-Justinian Roman law. It was issued {ca. a.d. 16 i) not as a 
creative work but as an elementary manual for students; if we find it a 
masterpiece of orderly exposition, we may imagine the intellectual stature 
of the men whose lost treatises it summarized. Sixty years later Papinian, 
Paulus, and Ulpian brought Roman jurisprudence to its height; while the 
administration of the law fell a victim to violence and chaos, they gave 
it a rational formulation and consistency. After them the great science sank 
in the general ruin. 



CHAP, xvin) 


ROMAN LAW 


393 


II. THE SOURCES OF THE LAW 

As the terminology of science and philosophy comes mostly from the Greek, 
betraying their source, so the language of the law comes mostly from the Latin. 
Law in general was ius, justice or right; lex meant a specific law.* Jurisprudence- 
wisdom in the law— was defined in the Digest of Justinian (a.d. 533) as both a 
science and an art: the “science of the just and the unjust,” and the “art [i.e., 
administration] of the good and the equitable.” ^ Ius included unwritten law, or 
custom, as well as written law. The latter was composed of ius civile— the “law of 
[Roman] citizens”— and ius gejjtiiun— “the law of the nations.” Civil law was 
“public law” when it related to the state or the official worship, and “private law” 
when it dealt with the legal interrelations of the citizens. 

Roman law as a whole flowed from five sources, i . Under the Republic the 
ultimate source of law was the will of the citizens, expressed as leges in the Curial 
and Centurial Assemblies, and as plebiscita (“decided by the plebs”) in the 
Tribal Assembly. The Senate acknowledged leges only when they had been pro- 
posed to the assemblies with the proper formalities and by a magistrate of 
Senatorial rank. When Senate and assembly agreed in passing a measure, it was 
proclaimed in the name of Senatus Populusque Romanus. 

2. The Senate itself, in theory, had no lawmaking power under the Republic; 
its senatusconsulta were, formally, recommendations to the magistrates; gradu- 
ally they became directives, then imperatives, until in the later Republic and 
under the Empire they took on the force of laws. Altogether the laws passed by 
the assemblies or the Senate were so few in the course of six centuries as to 
astonish one accustomed to the legislative flux of modem states. 

3. The need for minor or more specific laws was met by the edicta of the 
municipal officials. Each new urban praetor (our “chief city magistrate”) issued 
an edictum praetorium, announced by a herald in the Forum and inscribed upon 
a wall, and stating the legal principles on which the praetor proposed to act and 
judge during his year’s term. Similar edicts could be put forth by circuit judges 
(praetores peregrini) and provincial praetors. Through their power of itn- 
perium, or rule, the praetors were allowed not only to interpret existing laws, but 
to make new ones. In this way Roman law combined the stability of its basic 
legislation with the flexibility of praetorian judgments. When a law or clause 
was carried down from one praetorian edict to the next for many years, it be- 
came a definite part of the ius honorarium; by the time of Cicero this “law of the 
offices” had displaced the Twelve Tables as the main text of legal instruction in 
Rome. Nevertheless, a praetor often reversed the decisions, and sometimes con- 
tradicted the principles, of a predecessor, so that uncertainties of law and ar- 
bitrariness of judgment were added to the abuses natural in every judicial system 
operated by men. It was to end this uncertainty that Hadrian instructed Julianus 

* Cf. French droit and lot, German Recht and Gesetz. 



394 CAESAR AND CHRIST (CHAP. XVIIl 

to unify all preceding ius honorarium in a Perpetual Edict alterable only by the 
emperor. 

4. The constitutiones prmciptim, or statutes of the princes, became themselves 
in the second century a varied source of law. They took four forms, {a) The 
prince issued edicta by virtue of his imperium as an official of the city; these were 
valid for the whole Empire, but apparently lapsed after his death, {h) His 
decreta as a judge, like those of other magistrates, had the force of law. {c) Im- 
perial rescripta were his answers to inquiries. Usually they were epistulae—lctctrs 
—or subscriptiones, brief replies “written under” a question or petition. The wise 
and pithy letters in which Trajan answered the requests of governmental ap- 
pointees for instruction were incorporated into the laws of the Empire and kept 
their validity long after his death, {d) The mandat a of the emperors were their 
directives to officials; in the course of time these came to constitute a detailed code 
of administrative law. 

5. Under certain circumstances law could be created by the responsa pni- 
dentium. It must have been a pleasant sight when learned jurists sat in chairs in 
the open Forum (or, in later decades, in their homes), and gave legal opinions to 
all who asked, taking their chances on some indirect remuneration. Often their 
advice was sohcited by lawyers or municipal judges. Like the great rabbis of the 
Jews they reconciled contradictions, drew subtle distinctions, interpreted and 
adjusted the ancient law to the needs of life or the exigencies of politics. Their 
written replies, by unwritten custom, had an authority only less than the law’s. 
Augustus gave such opinions full legal force on two conditions; that the jurist 
should have received from the Emperor the ius respondendi, or right of giving 
legal opinions; and that the reply should be sent under seal to the judge trying 
the case in point. By the time of Justinian these responsa had become a vast school 
and literature of law, the fountain and foundation of his culminating Digest 
and Code, 


III. THE LAW OF PERSONS 

“All law,” says the precise Gaius, “pertains to persons, to property, or 
to procedure.” ® The word persona had signified an actor’s mask; later it 
was apphed to the part played by a man in life; finally it came to mean 
the man himself— as if to say that we can never know a man, but only the 
parts he plays, the mask or masks that he wears. 

The first person in Roman law was the citizen. He was defined as any- 
one who had been accepted into a Roman tribe by birth, adoption, emanci- 
pation, or governmental grant. Within this franchise were three grades: ( i) 
full citizens, who enjoyed the fourfold right of voting {ius suffragii), of 
holding ofiice {ius honovutti^ ^ of marriage with a freeborn person {ius 



ROMAN LAW 


CHAP. XVIIl) 


395 


cormubii), and of engaging in commercial contracts protected by Roman 
law {ius coimnercii)-, (2) “citizens without suffrage,” who had the rights 
of marriage and contract, but not of voting or office; and (3) freedmen, 
who had the rights of voting and contract, but not of marriage or office. 
The full citizen had, furthermore, certain exclusive rights in private law: 
the power of the father over his children {patria potestas), of the husband 
over his wife (vtanus) , of an owner over his property, including his slaves 
(dominium), and of a freeman over another by contract (mancipium). A 
kind of potential citizenship, called Latinitas or ius Latii, was conferred 
by Rome upon the free inhabitants of favored towns and colonies, whereby 
they acquired the right of contract, but not of intermarriage, with Romans, 
and their magistrates received full Roman citizenship upon completing their 
terms of office. Each city of the Empire had its own citizens and condi- 
tions of citizenship; and by a unique tolerance a man might be a citizen— 
and enjoy the civic rights— of several cities at once. The most precious privi- 
lege of a Roman citizen was the safeguarding of his person, property, and 
rights by the law, and his immunity from torture or violence in the trying 
of his case. It was the glory of Roman law that it protected the individual 
against the state. 

The second person in Roman law was the father. The patria potestas had 
been weakened by the spread of law into areas formerly governed by 
custom; but we may judge its surviving force from the fact that when 
Aulus Fulvius set out to join Catiline’s army, his father called him back and 
put him to death. In general, however, the power of the father declined as 
that of the government rose; democracy entered the family when it left 
the state. In the early Republic the fathers had been the state; the family 
heads formed the Curial Assembly, and the clan heads probably constituted 
the Senate. Rule through family and clan diminished as population became 
more abundant and diverse, and life more mobile, commercial, and complex; 
kinship, status, and custom were replaced by contract and law.^ Children 
won greater freedom from their parents, wives from their husbands, indi- 
viduals from their groups. Trajan compelled a father to emancipate a son 
whom he had maltreated; Hadrian took from the father the right of life 
and death over his household and transferred it to the courts; Antoninus 
forbade a father to sell his children into slavery.® Custom had long since 
reduced the use of these old powers to rare occurrences. Law tends to lag 
behind moral development, not because law cannot learn, but because ex- 
perience has shown the wisdom of testing new ways in practice before con- 
gealing them into law. 

The Roman woman gained new rights as the man lost old ones; but she 
was clever enough to disguise her freedom under continuing legal disa- 



39<5 CAESAR AND CHRIST (cHAP, XVIII 

bilities. The law of the Republic assumed that she was never sui iuris, “of 
her own right,” but always dependent upon some male guardian; “according 
to our ancestors,” said Gains, “even women of mature age must be kept 
in tutelage because of the lightness of their minds.” ® In the later Republic 
and under the Empire this legal dependence was largely annulled by femi- 
nine charms and willfulness, abetted by male susceptibility and affection. 
From Cato the Elder to Commodus Roman society, legally patriarchal, was 
ruled by women, with all the graceful mastery of Renaissance Italian or 
Bourbon French salons. The laws of Augustus made some obeisance to the 
facts by releasing from tiitela any woman who had borne three legitimate 
children.^ Hadrian decreed that women might dispose of their property as 
they liked, provided they obtained the consent of their guardians; but actual 
procedure soon dispensed with this consent. By the end of the second cen- 
tury all compulsory tutelage was ended in law for free women over 
twenty-five. 

The consent of both fathers was still required for legal marriage.® Mar- 
riage by confarreatio was now (a.d. i6o) confined to a few Senatorial 
families. Marriage by purchase {coemptio) lingered as a form; the bride- 
groom paid for the bride by weighing an as or an ingot of bronze in a 
scale before five witnesses, her father or her guardian having consented.® 
Most marriages were now by usus, i.e., cohabitation. To avoid falling under 
the maniis or proprietory power of her husband, the wife absented herself 
three nights in each year; thereby she retained control of her property, 
excepting her dowry. Indeed, the husband often put his property in his 
wife’s name to avoid suits for damages or the penalties of bankruptcy.^® 
Such marriage sine nunu could be ended by either party at will; marriage 
by other forms could be ended only by the husband. Adultery was still a 
minor offense in the man; in the woman it was a major offense against the 
institutions of property and inheritance. But th.e husband no longer had 
the right to kill his wife taken in adultery; this right was now vested tech- 
nically in her father, actually in the courts; and the penalty was banishment. 
Concubinage was recognized by the law as a substitute for marriage, but not 
as an accompaniment to it; and a man could not legally have two concubines 
at once. Children by a concubine were classed as illegitimate and could not 
inherit— which made concubinage all the more attractive to men who liked 
to be courted by hunters of legacies. Vespasian, Antoninus Pius, and Marcus 
Aurelius hved in concubinage after the death of their wives.^^ 

The law struggled to encourage parentage among the freeborn, but with 
negligible results. Infanticide was forbidden e.xcept in the case of infants 
deformed or incurably diseased. The detected procurer of abortion was 
banished and lost part of his property; if the woman died he was to be put 



ROMAN LAW 


CHAP. XVlll) 


397 


to death; these laws, of course, were largely evaded then as now. Children 
of any age remained under the authority of the father except when thrice 
sold by him into bondage, or when formally emancipated, or when the son 
held a public office or became a f.mten dialis, or when a daughter married 
cwn manu or became a Vestal Virgin. If a son married in the lifetime of his 
father, the patria potestas over the grandchildren resided in the grandfather.^® 
By the legislation of Augustus the earnings of a son in the army, in public 
office, in priestly orders, or in the hberal professions were freed from the 
old rule that such gains belonged to the father. A son might still be sold 
into bondage (mancipiuTn) ; but this differed from slavery {servitus) in leav- 
ing the bondsman with his former civic rights. 

The slave had no legal rights whatever; indeed, Roman law hesitated to 
apply the term persona to him and compromised by calling him an “imper- 
sonal man.” It is only by a considerate error that Gains discusses him 
under the law of persons; logically the slave came under the rubric of prop- 
erty {res) . He could not own, inherit, or bequeath; he could not make a 
legal marriage; his children were all classed as illegitimate, and the children 
of a slave woman were classed as slaves even if the father was free.^® Slaves 
male or female might be seduced by their master without legal redress. The 
slave could not bring action in the courts against those who injured him; he 
could proceed in such a case only through his owner. The latter, under the 
law of the Republic, could beat him, imprison him, condemn him to fight 
beasts in the arena, expose him to die of starvation, or kill him, with cause 
or without, and with no other control than a pubhc opinion formed by 
slaveowners. If a slave ran away and was caught he could be branded or 
crucified; Augustus boasted that he had recaptured 30,000 runaway slaves 
and had crucified all who had not been claimed.^® If, under these or other 
provocations, a slave killed his master, law required that all the slaves of the 
murdered man should be put to death. VTen Pedanius Secundus, urban 
prefect, was so slain (a.d. 61), and his 400 slaves were condemned to die, a 
minority in the Senate protested, and an angry crowd in the streets de- 
manded mercy; but the Senate ordered the law to be carried out, in the 
belief that only by such measures could a master be secure.^^ 

It IS to the credit of the Empire— or perhaps of the diminishing supply of 
slaves— that their condition was progressively improved under the emperors. 
Claudius prohibited the killing of a useless slave and ruled that an abandoned 
sick slave who recovered should become automatically free. The lex Petronia, 
probably under Nero, forbade owners, without a magistrate’s approval, 
to condemn slaves to fight in the arena. Nero allowed maltreated slaves to 
use his statue as an asylum and appointed a judge to hear their complaints— 
a modest advance that seemed revolutionary to Rome, since it opened the 



398 CAESAR AND CHRIST (CHAP. XVIH 

courts to slaves. Domitian made it a criminal offense to mutilate slaves for 
sensual purposes. Hadrian ended the right of the owner to kill a slave with- 
out magisterial sanction. Antoninus Pius permitted an abused slave to take 
sanctuary in any temple and had him sold to another master if he could 
prove injury. Marcus Aurelius encouraged owners to bring before the 
courts, rather than themselves punish, damages sustained by them from 
their slaves; in this way, he hoped, law and judgment would gradually re- 
place brutality and private revenge.^® Finally a great jurist of the third cen- 
tury, Ulpian, proclaimed what only a few philosophers had dared suggest— 
that “by the law of Nature all men are equal.” Other jurists laid it down as 
a maxim that where the freedom or slavery of a man was in question, all 
doubts should favor liberty.^® 

Despite these mitigations, the legal subjection of slaves is the worst blot 
on Roman law. The last indignity was the tax and restrictions upon emanci- 
pation. Many owners evaded the lex Fufia Canina by informally freeing a 
slave without official witness or legal ceremony; such liberation, however, 
conferred not citizenship but only Latinitas. The slave freed by process of 
law became a citizen with limited civic rights; but custom required him to 
pay his respects to his former owner every morning, attend him when 
needed, vote for him at every opportunity, and, in some cases, pay him a 
portion of all money earned. If the freedman died intestate, his property 
went automatically to his living patron; if he made a will he was expected 
to leave him a part of his estate.-^ Only when the master was dead, dutifully 
mourned, and safely buried could the freedman really breathe the air of 
freedom. 

To these general divisions of the law of persons must be added the legisla- 
tion which in modem codes is separately known as criminal law. Roman 
jurispradence recognized crimes against the individual, the state, and social 
or business groups considered as juridical persons. Against the state one 
might be guilty of maiestas, treason by act or word; vis public a, sedition; 
sacrilegiwn, offenses against the state religion; ambitus, bribery; crimen 
repetundarum, extortion or corruption in public administration; pecidatus, 
embezzlement of state funds; and corruptio judicis, bribery of a judo-e or 
juryman; from this partial list we may see that corruption has an ancient 
pedigree and a probable future. Against the individual one could commit 
iniuria, physical injury; ]alsum, deception; stuprum, indecency; and caedes, 
murder. Cicero mentions a lex Scantinia against pederasty; Augustus cor- 
rected the error with a fine. Martial with epigrams, Domitian with death. 
Personal injury was no longer punished with equivalent retaliation, as in the 
Twelve Tables, but by a fine. Suicide was no crime; on the contrary, before 



ROMAN LAW 


399 


CHAP. XVHl) 

Domitian, it was in some sense rewarded; a man condemned to death could 
usually, by suicide, ensure the validation of his will and the unimpeded trans- 
mission of his property to his heirs. The law left the last choice free. 


IV. THE LAW OF PROPERTY 

Problems of ownership, obligation, exchange, contract, and debt took up by 
far the largest part of Roman law. Material possession was the very life of Rome, 
and the increase of wealth and the expansion of trade demanded a body of law 
immeasurably more complex than the simple code of the Decemvirs. 

Ownership {dominium)' C2.mt by inheritance or acquisition. Since the father 
owned as agent and trustee of the family, the children and grandchildren were 
potential owners— heredes in the law’s queer phrase— “their own heirs.” If 
the father died intestate they succeeded automatically to the family property, 
and the oldest father among the sons inherited the dominium. The making of 
valid wiOs was hedged about with hundreds of legal restrictions, and their com- 
position required, as now, a gorgeous and sonorous tautology. Every testator was 
compelled to leave a specified portion of his estate to his children, another part 
to a wife who had borne him three children, and (in some cases) parts to his 
brothers, sisters, and ascendants. No heir might take any part of an estate with- 
out assuming all the debts and other legal obligations of the deceased; not infre- 
quently a Roman found himself saddled with a dcmmosa hereditas—^ legacy, so 
to speak, in the red. Where an owner died without children and without a will, 
his property and his debts passed automatically to the nearest “agnate,” or relative 
descended from a common ancestor exclusively through males. In the later Em- 
pire this male conceit abated, and by the time of Justinian agnates and cognates 
(relatives through male or female lines of ascent) inherited with equal right. 
An old law passed on the urging of Cato (169 b.c.) had forbidden any Roman 
who owned 100,000 sesterces ($15,000) or more to bequeath any part of his 
estate to a woman. This lex Vocojiia was still on the statute books in Gains’ time, 
but love had found a way. The testator left property on trust {fideicommissum) 
to a qualified heir, and bound him by a solemn request to transfer the property 
before a stated date to the woman named. By this and other channels much of the 
wealth of Rome passed into the hands of women. Gifts offered another escape 
from testamentary law; but gifts made in prospect of death were subject to legal 
scrutiny, and under Justinian they were liable to the same laws as those that 
harassed legacies. 

Acquisition came by transfer, or by legal conveyance resulting from a suit at 
law. Transfer {mancipatio, “taking in hand”) was a formal gift or sale before 
witnesses and with scales struck by a copper ingot as token of a sale; without 
this ancient ritual no exchange had the sanction or protection of the law. An 
intermediate or potential ownership was recognized under the name of possessio — 



CAESAR AND CHRIST 


400 


(chap, XVIII 


the right to hold or use property; e.g., tenants on state lands were possessores 
(“sitters,” squatters), not domini; but their prescriptive right (usucapio, “taking 
by use”) became dominium, and could no longer be questioned after two years 
of unchallenged occupancy. Probably this lenient conception of occupation as 
so soon generating ownership came from patricians who were in this manner 
acquiring public lands.^* By the same right of usucapio a woman who lived with 
a man through a year without three nights’ absence became the property (in 
manii) of the man. 

Obligation was any compulsion by law to the performance of an act. It could 
arise by delict or by contract. Delicts or torts— noncontractual wrongs committed 
against a person or his property— were in many cases punished by an obligation 
to pay the injured person a sum of money in compensation. A contract was an 
agreement enforceable at law. It did not have to be written; indeed, until the 
second century a.d. the verbal agreement made by uttering the word spondeo— 
“I promise”— before a witness was considered more sacred than any written com- 
pact. The many witnesses and solemn ceremony once required for legal contract 
were no longer necessary; business was quickened by the legal recognition of 
any clear agreement— usually entries made by the parties in their account books 
(tabulae) the law guarded transactions carefully: it warned the seller with a 
caveat venditor, as well as the buyer with a caveat emptor, against the myriad 
forms of cheating natural to civilized life. Any seller of slaves or cattle, for ex- 
ample, was required by law to disclose their physical defects to the purchaser and 
was held accountable despite a plea of ignorance.^® 

Debt was contracted by loan, mortgage, deposit, or trust. Loans for consump- 
tion were usually secured by a mortgage on realty or movable goods. A default 
in principal entitled the mortgagee to take over the property. In early republican 
law, as we have seen, such default permitted the lender to attach the person of the 
borrower as a bondsman.* The lexPoetelia (326 b.c.) modified this rule by allow- 
ing the debtor to work off his obligation while retaining his freedom. After 
Caesar, defaulted mortgages were usually satisfied by the sale of the debtor’s 
property without jeopardy to his person; but cases of enslavement to a creditor 
occur as late as Justinian. Commercial defaults were mitigated by a law of bank- 
ruptcy which sold the bankrupt’s property to pay his debts, but permitted him 
to keep as much of his later acquisitions as his subsistence required. 

The chief crimes against propert)^ were damage, theft, and rapine— theft with 
violence. The Twelve Tables had condemned a detected thief to be flogged and 
then delivered as a bondsman to his victim; if the thief was a slave he was to be 
scourged and flung from the Tarpeian rock. Increased social security permitted 
praetorian law to soften these severities to a twofold, threefold, or fourfold 
restitution.-® In its final form the law of property was the most perfect part of 
the Roman code. 


• The mortgagor was in law bound (.nexus) to the mortgagee; but the obscure term nexum 
was apparently applied to any solemnly sworn obligation. 



CHAP. XVIIl) 


ROMAN LAW 


401 


V. THE LAW OF PROCEDURE 

Of all ancient peoples the Romans were the most prone to litigation, despite the 
discouraging complexity, technicality, and confusing fictions of their procedural 
law. Doubtless our own legal actions would have seemed to them equally devious 
and prolonged. The older the civilization, the longer the lawsuits. Any man, as 
noted above, could make himself a prosecutor in a Roman court. In the patrician 
Republic the accuser, the defendant, and the magistrate were required to follow 
a form called legis actio, or process of law, and the slightest deviation invalidated 
the action. “Thus,” says Gaius, “a man who sued another for cutting his vines, and 
in his action called them ‘vines,’ lost his case because he should have called them 
‘trees,’ since the Twelve Tables speak generally of trees, and not particularly of 
vines.” Each party deposited with the magistrate a sum of money {sacra- 
mentimi), which was forfeited by the losing party to the state religion. The 
defendant also had to give bail {vadimonhmi) as security for his subsequent ap- 
pearances. The magistrate then turned over the dispute to a person on the list 
of those qualified to act as judges. In some cases the judge issued an interim inter- 
dictiim, requiring one or more of the parties in the case to perform or refrain 
from certain actions. If the defendant lost, his property— sometimes his person— 
could be seized by the plaintiff until the judgment was satisfied. 

About 150 B.c. the lex Aebiitia abolished the necessity of using this ritual legis 
actio, and accepted in its place a procedure per jontmlcnn. Specific acts and words 
were no longer required; the parties shared with the magistrate in determining 
the form under which the matter was to be submitted to the judge; and the 
magistrate then wrote to the judge an instruction {fonmcla) on the factual and 
legal questions involved; it was partly in this way that the praetor, as magistrate, 
made “praetorian law.” In the second century a.d. a third mode of action— 
cog 7 i!tio extraoi'dinaria— came into use: the magistrate decided the case himself. 
By the end of the third century the formulary procedure had disappeared, and 
the summary judgment of a magistrate responsible only to the emperor, and 
usually owing his office to him, reflected the coming of absolute monarchy. 

The litigants could conduct their case, and the praetor or judge decide 
it, without the help of lawyers if they wished; but as the index was not 
often a professional trained in the law, and the litigants might at every step 
stumble over a technicality, all parties to a dispute usually sought the aid 
of trial lawyers {advocati) , legal technicians {pragmatici) , consultants 
{iurisconsulti) , or jurists (iurisprudentes) . There was no lack of legal talent, 
for every fond parent yearned to see his son an advocate, and the law, then 
as now, was the vestibule to public office. A character in Petronius gives his 
son a collection of red-backed books {codices) “to leam a little law,” as “it 
spells money.” A law student began by learning the elements from some 



402 


CAESAR AND CHRIST 


(chap. XVIII 

private instructor; in his second stage he attended the consultations of 
eminent jurists; thereafter he apprenticed himself to a practicing lawyer. 
Early in the second century a.d. certain iurisconsulti set up in various parts 
of Rome schools {stationes) at which they gave instruction or advice in 
the law; Ammianus complains of their high fees, saying that they charged 
even for their yawns and made matricide venial if the client paid enough.^ 
These teachers were called hiris civilis projessores; apparently the title of 
processor came from the fact that they were required by law to declare 
(profiteri) their intention of teaching, and to secure a license therefor from 
the public authority.®® 

Out of the many lawyers so trained there were inevitably some who sold 
their learning to sordid causes,®^ accepted bribes to present their client’s 
case weakly,®® found loopholes in the law for any crime, fomented disputes 
among rich men, dragged on suits to any lucrative length,®® and shook the 
courts or the Forum with their intimidating questioning and their vitupera- 
tive summations. Forced to compete for cases, some lawyers sought to build 
a reputation by walking hurriedly through the streets with bundles of 
documents in their hands, borrowed rings on their fingers, dependents at- 
tending them, and hired claqueurs to applaud their speech.®^ So many ways 
had been found of circumventing the old Cincian law against fees that 
Claudius legalized them up to 10,000 sesterces per case; any fee above this 
figure was to be recoverable by law.®® This restriction was easily evaded, 
for we hear of a lawyer in Vespasian’s reign amassing a fortune of 300,000,- 
000 sesterces ($30,000,000).®® As in every generation, there were attorneys 
and judges whose clear and disciplined minds were at the service of truth 
and justice regardless of fee; and the lowest practitioners were redeemed 
by the great jurists whose names are the highest in the history of the law. 

Courts for the trial of offenders varied from the hearings held by indi- 
vidual judges or magistrates to the assemblies, the Senate, and the emperor. 
Instead of a single judge the praetor might choose by lot (subject to a 
number of challenges by accuser and defendant) a jury of almost any size, 
usually fifty-one or seventy-five, from the 850 Senatorial or equestrian 
names on the jury fist. Two special courts were permanently maintained: 
the decemviri, or Ten Men, to try cases of civil status; and the centuirwiri, 
or Hundred Men, to hear suits in property and bequest. The proceedings 
of these bodies were open to the public, for the younger Pliny describes 
the great crowd that came to hear him address the larger court.®’^ Juvenal ®® 
and Apuleius ®® complain of judicial procrastination and venality, but their 
very indignation suggests exceptional cases. 

Trials were marked by a freedom of speech and action seldom known in 
modem courts. Several lawyers might appear on each side; some specialized 



ROMAN LAW 


CHAP. XVIII ) 


403 


in preparing the evidence, some in presenting it. The proceedings were re- 
corded by various clerks (notarii, actuarii, scribae), and were sometimes 
taken down in shorthand; Martial says of certain scribes, “However fast 
the words may run, their hands are quicker still.” Plutarch tells how 
stenographers took down the speeches of Cicero, often to his discomfort. 
Witnesses were dealt with according to time-honored precedents. Says the 
exemplary Quintilian: 

In the examination of a witness the first essential is to know his 
type. For a timid witness may be terrorized, a fool outwitted, an 
irascible man provoked, and vanity flattered. The shrewd and self- 
possessed witness must be dismissed at once as malicious and obstinate; 
or ... if his past life admits of criticism, his credit may be over- 
thrown by the scandalous charges that can be brought against him.^^ 

Almost any kind of argument might be made by the advocate. He could 
show the court pictures of the alleged crime, painted on canvas or wood; 
he could hold a child in his arms while arguing a point; he could bare the 
scars of an accused soldier or the wounds of a chent. Defenses were con- 
trived against these weapons. Quintilian tells how one attorney, when his 
opponent illustrated a summation by bringing his client’s children into 
court, threw dice among them; the children scrambled for the tesserae and 
ruined a peroration.^® The slaves of either party to a suit might be tortured 
to elicit evidence, but such evidence was not admissible against their owners. 
Hadrian decreed that slaves should be tortured for evidence only as a last 
resort and under the strictest regulations, and he warned the courts that 
evidence secured by torture could never be trusted. Legal torture neverthe- 
less persisted, and was extended in the third century to freemen.'*^ The jury 
voted by depositing marked tablets in an um; a majority sufficed for a 
decision. In most cases the loser might appeal to a higher court, and finally, if 
he could afford it, to the emperor. 

Penalties were fixed by law rather than left to the discretion of the judge. 
They varied with the rank of the offender, being severest for the slave; he 
might be crucified, the citizen might not; and no Roman citizen, as every 
reader of the Acts of the Apostles knows, could be scourged, tortured, or 
put to death over his appeal to the emperor. Different penalties were laid 
upon honestiores and humiliores for the same crime; they varied also accord- 
ing as the offender was freeborn or freeman, solvent or bankrupt, soldier or 
civilian. The simplest punishment was a fine. Since the value of currency 
changed more rapidly than the penalties named in the law, certain anomalies 
ensued. The Twelve Tables exacted a fine of twenty-five asses (originally 
twenty-five pounds of copper) for striking a freeman; when rising prices 



CAESAR AND CHRIST 


404 


(chap. XVIII 


had lowered the as to six cents Lucius Veratius went about striking freemen 
in the face, followed by a slave who counted out twenty-five asses to each 
victim.^® Some offenses resulted in in^avm (“speechlessness”), chiefly the 
inab ility to appear, or be represented by another, in an action at law. A more 
stringent punishment was loss of civic rights {capitis deviinutio) , which took 
the progressive forms of incapacity to inherit, deportation, and enslavement. 
Deportation was the harshest form of exile: the condemned man was put in 
chains, confined in some inhospitable place, and deprived of all his property. 
Exiliiim was milder in allowing the victim to live in freedom wherever he 
pleased outside of Italy; relegatio, as in the case of Ovid, involved no con- 
fiscation, but compelled the outcast to stay in a specified town, usually far 
from Rome. Imprisonment was seldom used as a permanent punishment, but 
men might be condemned to menial labor on public works, or in the mines, 
or in the quarries of the state. Under the Republic a freeman sentenced to 
death could escape the penalty by leaving Rome or Italy; under the Empire 
the death penalty was imposed with increasing frequency and ruthlessness. 
Prisoners of war, and in some cases other condemned men, might be thrown 
into the Career T ulUammt, to die of starvation, rodents, and lice in under- 
ground darkness and irremovable filth.'*® There Jugurtha died, and Simon 
Ben-Giora, heroic defender of Jerusalem against Titus. There, said tradition, 
Peter and Paul had languished before their crucifixion, and had written their 
last addresses to the young Christian world. 


VI. THE LAW OF THE NATIONS 

The most difficult problem of Roman law was to adjust itself as an intelli- 
gent master to the varied codes and customs of the lands that Roman arms or 
diplomacy had won. Many of these states were older than Rome; what they 
had lost in mihtary courage they made up in proud traditions and a jealous 
fondness for their peculiar ways. Rome met the situation ably. A praetor 
peregrinus was appointed at first for the foreigners in Rome, then for Italy, 
then for the provinces; and power was given him to make some viable uni on 
between Roman and local law. The annual edicts of this praetor and the 
provincial governors and aediles gradually created the ms gentiimi by which 
the Empire was ruled. 

This “Law of the Nations” was not an international law— not a body of 
commitments accepted by the generality of states as governing their inter- 
relations. In a sense not much more tenuous than today there was in antiquity 
an international law, insofar as certain common customs were honored in 
peace and war— the mutual safeguarding of international merchants and 



ROMAN LAW 


CHAP. XVIIl) 


405 


diplomats, the granting of truce for the burial of the dead, .abstention from 
the use of poisoned arrows, etc. The jurists of Rome, by a patriotic ^fiction, 
described the ius gentium as la\V common to all nations. But they were too 
modest about Rome’s part in it. Actually it was local law adapted to Roman 
sovereignty, and designed to govern the peoples of Italy and the provinces 
without giving them Roman citizenship and the other rights of the ius civile. 

By a corresponding fiction the philosophers attempted to identify the 
Law of the Nations with the “Law of Nature.” The Stoics defined the latter 
as a moral code implanted in man by “namral reason.” Nature, they held, was 
a system of reason, a logic and order in all things; this order, spontaneously 
developing in society, and coming to consciousness in man, was natural law. 
Cicero phrased the fancy in a famous passage: 

True law is right reason in agreement with nature, world-wide in 
scope, unchanging, everlasting. . . . We may not oppose or alter 
that law, we cannot abolish it, we cannot be freed from its obligations 
by any legislature, and we need not look outside ourselves for an ex- 
pounder of it. This law does not differ for Rome and for Athens, for 
the present and for the future; ... it is and will be valid for all 
nations and all times. . . . He who disobeys it denies himself and his 
own nature.^^ 


It was a perfect statement of an ideal that grew in force as Stoicism reached 
the throne in the Antonines. Ulpian developed it into the far-reaching prin- 
ciple that class distinctions and privileges are accidental and artificial; and 
from this it was but a step to the Christian conception of all men as funda- 
mentally equal. But when Gains defined the ius gentium as simply “the law 
which natural reason has established among all mankind,” he was mis- 
taking Roman arms for Divine Providence. Roman law was the logic and 
economy of force; the great codes of ius civile and ius gentium were the rules 
by which a wise conqueror gave order, regularity, and time’s sanctity to a 
sovereignty based upon the legions’ strength. They were natural, but only 
in the sense that it is natural for the strong to use and abuse the weak. 

Nevertheless, there is something noble in this imposing architecture of 
government called Roman law. Since the victor must rule, it is a boon that 
the rules of his mastery should be clearly expressed; in this sense law is the 
consistency of power. It was natural that the Romans should create the 
greatest system of law in history: they loved order and had the means to 
enforce it; upon the chaos of a hundred diverse nations they laid an imperfect 
but sublime authority and peace. Other states had had laws, and legislators 
hke Hammurabi and Solon had issued small bodies of humane legislation; but 
no people had yet achieved that immense co-ordination, unification, and 



4o6 CAESAR AND CHRIST (CHAP. XVIII 

codification which occupied the highest legal minds of Rome from the 
Scaevolas to Justinian. 

The flexibility of the ius gentium facilitated the transmission of Roman 
law to medieval and modern states. It was a happy accident that while the 
chaos of barbarian invasion was mutilating the legal heritage in the West, the 
Code, Digest, and Imtitutes of Justinian were collected and formulated in 
Constantinople, in the comparative security and continuity of the Empire in 
the East. Through those labors, and a hundred lesser channels, and the silent 
tenacity of useful ways, Roman law entered into the canon law of the 
medieval Church, inspired the thinkers of the Renaissance, and became the 
basic law of Italy, Spain, France, Germany, Hungary, Bohemia, Poland, 
even— within the British Empire— of Scotland, Quebec, Ceylon, and South 
Africa. English law itself, the only legal edifice of comparable scope, took 
its rules of equity, admiralty, guardianship, and bequests from Roman canon 
law. Greek science and philosophy, Judeo-Greek Christianity, Greco-Ro- 
man democracy, Roman law— these are our supreme inheritance from the 
ancient world. 



CHAPTER XIX 


The Philosopher Kings 

A.D. 96 -I 8o 


I. NERVA 

W ITH the assassination of Domitian the principle of heredity disap- 
peared for a century from Roman monarchy. The Senate had never 
recognized inheritance as a source of sovereignty; now, after 1 2 3 years of 
submission, it reasserted its authority; and as in Rome’s beginnings it had 
chosen the king, now it named one of its own members princeps and im- 
perator. It was an act of courage intelligible only when we remember that 
the vigor of the Flavian family was exhausted in that same generation which 
had seen the vitality of the Senate renewed by Italian and provincial blood. 

Marcus Cocceius Nerva was sixty-six when supremacy surprised him. 
The colossal Nerva. of the Vatican shows a handsome and virile face; no one 
would suppose that this was a respectable jurist with a bad stomach, a mild 
and amiable poet who had once been hailed as “the Tibullus of our time.” ^ 
Perhaps the Senate had chosen him for his gray harmlessness. He consulted 
it on all policies, and kept his pledge never to be the cause of death to any of 
its members. He recalled Domitian’s exiles, restored their property, and 
moderated their revenge. He distributed 60,000,000 sesterces’ worth of 
lands among the poor, and established the alimenta—z state fund to encourage 
and finance parentage among the peasantry. He annulled many taxes, low- 
ered the inheritance dues, and freed the Jews from the tribute that Vespasian 
had laid upon them. At the same time he repaired the finances of the state by 
economy in his household and his government. With reason he thought that 
he had been just to all classes, and remarked that “I have done nothing that 
could prevent me from laying down the imperial office and returning to 
private life in safety.” ® But a year after his accession the Praetorian Guard, 
which had been forestalled in his nomination and resented his economy, 
besieged his palace, demanded the surrender of Domitian’s assassins, and 
killed several of Nerva’s councilors. He offered his throat to the swords of 
the soldiers, but they spared him. Humiliated, he wished to abdicate, but his 
friends persuaded him, instead, to return to Augustus’ example and adopt as 
his son and successor a man acceptable to the Senate and capable of ruling 

407 



CAESAR AND CHRIST 


408 


(chap. XIX 


not only the Empire, but the Guard as well. The greatest debt that Rome 
owed Nerva was that he chose Marcus Ulpius Traianus to succeed him. 
Three months later, after a reign of sixteen months, he passed away (98). 

The principle of adoption thus accidentally restored meant that each 
emperor, as he felt his powers decline, would associate with himself in rule 
the ablest and fittest man he could find, so that when death came there would 
be neither the absurdity of a Praetorian elevation, nor the risk of a natural but 
worthless heir, nor a civil war among competitors for the throne. It was a 
lucky chance that no son was bom to Trajan, Hadrian, or Antoninus Pius, 
and that each could apply the adoptive plan without slighting his offspring 
or his own parental love. While the principle was maintained it gave Rome 
“the finest succession of good and great sovereigns the world has ever had.” ® 


II. TRAJAN 

Trajan received word of his accession while he was in charge of a Roman 
army in Cologne. It was characteristic of him that he went on with his work 
at the frontier and postponed his coming to Rome for nearly two years. He 
had been bom in Spain of an Italian family long settled there; in him and in 
Hadrian Roman Spain arrived at political hegemony, as it had reached literary 
leadership in Seneca, Lucan, and Martial. He was the first in a long line of 
generals whose provincial birth and training seemed to give them the will-to- 
life that had gone from the native Roman stock. That Rome made no pro- 
test against this enthronement of a provincial was in itself an event and omen 
in Roman history. 

Trajan never ceased to be a general. His carriage was military, his presence 
commanding; his features were undistinguished but strong. Tall and robust, 
he was wont to march on foot v/ith his troops and ford with full armament 
the hundred rivers they had to cross. His courage showed a stoic impartiality 
between life and death. Told that Licinius Sura was plotting against him, he 
went to Sura’s house for dinner, ate without scmtiny whatever food was 
offered him, and had himself shaved by Sura’s barber.^ He was not in any 
technical sense a philosopher. He used to take Dio Chrysostom, the “golden- 
mouthed” rhetor, with him in his chariot to discourse to him on philosophy, 
but he confessed that he could not understand a word of Dio’s talk the 
worse for philosophy. His mind was clear and direct; he uttered an amazing 
minimum of nonsense for a man. He was vain, like all human beings, but 
completely unassuming; he took no advantage of his office, joined his friends 
at table and the hunt, drank with them copiously, and indulged in occasional 
pederasty as if out of deference to the customs of his time. Rome thought it 



CHAP. XIX) THE PHILOSOPHER KINGS 409 

worthy of praise that he never disturbed his wife Plotina by making love 
to another woman. 

When, in the forty-second year of his age, Trajan reached Rome, he was 
at the height of his faculties. His simplicity, geniality, and moderation readily 
won a people so lately acquainted with tyranny. The younger Pliny was 
chosen by the Senate to pronounce the “panegyric” of greeting. About the 
same time Dio Chrysostom delivered before the Emperor a discourse on the 
duties of a monarch as viewed by the Stoic philosophy. Both Pliny and Dio 
distinguished between dominatio and principatus-. the prince was to be not 
lord of the state but its first servant, the executive delegate of the people, 
chosen through their representatives, the senators. Imperaturus onmibiis 
elegi debet ex o?miibus, said Pliny: “He who is to command all should be 
elected by all.” ® The general listened courteously. 

Such fair beginnings were not new in history; what astonished Rome was 
that Trajan fulfilled their promise abundantly. He gave to his aides or asso- 
ciates the villas in which his predecessors had stayed for a few weeks in the 
year; “he regarded nothing as his own,” said Pliny, “unless his friends pos- 
sessed it”; as for himself he lived as simply as Vespasian. He asked the Sen- 
ate’s opinion on all matters of moment, and discovered that he might wield 
nearly absolute power if he never used absolute speech. The Senate was 
willing to let him rule if he would observe the forms that maintained its 
dignity and prestige; like the rest of Rome, it now loved security too much 
to be capable of freedom. Perhaps also it was pleased to find Trajan a con- 
servative, who had no intention of mulcting the rich to appease the poor. 

Trajan was an able and tireless administrator, a sound financier, a just 
judge. To him the Digest of Justinian ascribes the principle, “It is better that 
the guilty should remain unpunished than that the innocent should be con- 
demned.” ® By careful supervision of expenditures (and some lucrative 
conquests) he was able to complete extensive public works without increas- 
ing taxation; on the contrary, he lowered taxes and published a budget to 
expose the revenues and outlays of the government to examination and 
cnticism. He required from the senators who enjoyed his comradeship an 
administrative devotion almost as meticulous as his own. The patricians en- 
tered the bureaucracy and worked as well as played; Trajan’s extant 
correspondence with them suggests how carefully they labored under his 
watchful and inspiring leadership. Many of the Eastern cities had misman- 
aged their finances to the point of bankruptcy, and Trajan sent cur at ores 
like the younger Pliny to help and check them. The procedure weakened 
municipal independence and institutions, but it was unavoidable; self-gov- 
ernment, by extravagance and incompetence, had brought its own end. 

Nurtured on war, the Emperor was a frank imperialist who preferred 



CAESAR AND CHRIST 


410 


(chap. XIX 


order to liberty and power to peace. Hardly a year after his arrival in Rome 
he set out for the conquest of Dacia. Roughly corresponding to the Rumania 
of 1 940, Dacia plunged like a fist into the heart of Germany, and would there- 
fore be of great military value in the struggle that Trajan foresaw between 
the Germans and Italy. Its annexation would give Rome control of the road 
that ran down the Save to the Danube and thence to Byzantium— an invalu- 
able land route to the East. Besides, Dacia had gold mines. In a campaign 
brilliantly planned and swiftly executed, Trajan led his legions through all 
obstacles and resistance to the Dacian capital, Sarmizegetusa, and forced its 
surrender. A Roman sculptor has left us an impressive portrait of the Dacian 
king Decebalus— a face noble with strength and character. Trajan reinstated 
him as a client king and returned to Rome ( 102) ; but Decebalus soon broke 
his agreements and resumed his independent sway. Trajan marched his army 
back into Dacia (105), bridged the Danube with a structure that was one of 
the engineering marvels of the century, and again stormed the Dacian capi- 
tal. Decebalus was killed, a strong garrison was left to hold Sarmizegetusa, 
and Trajan went back to Rome to celebrate his victory with 1 0,000 gladiators 
(probably war captives) in 1 2 3 days of public games. Dacia became a Roman 
province, received Roman colonists, married them, and corrupted the Latin 
language in its own Rumanian way. The gold mines of Transylvania were 
put under the direction of an imperial procurator and soon paid for the 
material cost of the war. To reimburse himself for his labors Trajan took 
out of Dacia a million pounds of silver and half a million pounds of gold— 
the last substantial booty that the legions would win for Roman sloth. 

With these spoils the Emperor distributed 650 denarii ($260) to all such 
citizens as applied for the gift— probably some 3 00,000; and enough remained 
to remedy the unemployment of demobilization with the greatest program 
of public works, governmental aid, and architectural adornment that Italy 
had seen since Augustus. Trajan improved the older aqueducts and built a 
new one which is still in operation. At Ostia he constructed a spacious harbor 
connected by canals with the Tiber and the harbor of Claudius, and deco- 
rated it with warehouses that were models of beauty as well as of use. His 
engineers repaired old roads, carried a new one across the Pontine marshes, 
and laid the Via Traiana from Beneventum to Brundisium. They reopened 
the Claudian tunnel that had drained the Fucine Lake, dredged harbors at 
Centumcellae and Ancona, gave Ravenna an aqueduct, and Verona an 
amphitheater. Trajan supplied the funds for new roads, bridges, and build- 
ings throughout the Empire. But he discouraged the architectural rivalry 
of the cities and urged them to spend their surplus on improving the condi- 
tion and environment of the poor. He was always ready to help any city 
that had suffered from earthquake, fire, or storm. He tried to promote agri- 



CHAP.XIX) THE PHILOSOPHER KINGS 41 1 

culture in Italy by requiring senators to invest a third of their capital in 
Italian land; and when he saw that this was extending the latifundia, he 
encouraged small proprietors by advancing them state funds at low interest 
for the purchase and improvement of their lands and homes.® To raise the 
birth rate he enlarged the alimenta, or feeding fund: the state made mortgage 
loans at five per cent (half the usual rate) to Italian peasants, and allowed 
local charity boards to distribute the interest to poor parents at sixteen ses- 
terces (1 1.60) monthly for each boy raised by them, and twelve for each 
girl. The sums seem small, but contemporary testimony indicates that from 
sixteen to twenty sesterces sufficed for a month’s care of a child on a first- 
century Italian farm.^® With a similar hope Trajan allowed the children of 
Rome to receive the corn dole in addition to that given to their parents. The 
system of alimenta was enlarged by Hadrian and the Antonines, was ex- 
tended to several parts of the Empire, and was supplemented by private phi- 
lanthropy; so the younger Pliny gave 30,000 sesterces a year as alimertta to 
the children of Comum, and Caeha Macrina left a milhon to like purpose 
for the children of Tarracina in Spain. 

Trajan, like Augustus, favored Italy over the provinces, and Rome over 
Italy. He used to the full the architectural genius of Apollodorus, a Damas- 
cene Greek who had designed the new roads and aqueduct, and the Danube 
bridge. The Emperor now commissioned him to clear away large blocks of 
houses, cut 130 feet from the base of the Quirinal hill, lay out in this and the 
adjoining space a new forum equal in area to all preceding forums combined, 
and surround it with buildings of a majesty fit for a world capital that had 
reached the height of its power and opulence. The Forum Traiarmm was 
entered through the Triumphal Arch of Trajan. The interior, 370 by 354 
feet, was paved with smooth stone and surrounded by a high wall and 
portico; east and west walls were indented with hemicycle exedrae formed of 
Doric columns. In the center rose the Basilica Ulpia, named after Trajan’s 
clan and intended as an office building for commerce and finance; its ex- 
terior was adorned with fifty monohthic columns, its floor was of marble. 
Its immense nave was enclosed by granite colonnades, its roof of massive 
beams was covered with bronze. Near the northern end of the new forum 
two libraries were built, one for Latin works, the other for Greek. Between 
them rose the column, behind them the temple, of Trajan. When the forum 
was complete it was accounted one of the architectural wonders of the world. 

The column, still standing, was first of all an achievement in transporta- 
tion. It was cut from eighteen cubes of marble, each weighing some fifty 
tons; the blocks were brought by ship from the island of Paros, were trans- 
ferred to barges at Ostia, were drawn against the current up the river, and 
were moved on rollers up the bank and through the streets to their site. The 



CAESAR AND CHRIST 


412 


(chap. XIX 


cubes were recut into thirty-two blocks. Eight formed the pedestal; three 
sides of this were decorated with sculptures; the fourth opened into a spiral 
stairway of 185 marble steps. The shaft, twelve feet in diameter at the 
bottom, and ninety-seven feet high, was composed of twenty-one blocks and 
was topped by a statue of Trajan holding a globe of the world. Before being 
raised into position the blocks were carved with reliefs picturing the cam- 
paigns in Dacia. These reliefs are the culmination of Flavian realism and of 
ancient historical sculpture. They do not aim at the calm beauty or idealized 
types of Greek sculpture; they seek rather to convey a vivid impression of 
living individuals in the actual scenes and turmoil of war; they are Balzac 
and Zola after Corneille and Racine. In the 2000 figures of these 124 spiral 
panels we follow the conquest of Dacia step by step: the Roman cohorts is- 
suing from their stations in full armor; the crossing of the Danube on a pon- 
toon bridge; the pitching of a Roman camp in the enemy’s land; the confused 
conflict of spears, arrows, sickles, and stones; a Dacian village set to the 
torch, with women and children begging Trajan for mercy; Dacian women 
torturing Roman prisoners; soldiers displaying before the Emperor the heads 
of slain enemies; surgeons treating the wounded; the Dacian princes drinking 
one after another the cup of poison; the head of Decebalus brought as a 
trophy to Trajan; the long file of captive men, women, and children 
snatched from their homes into foreign settlement or Roman slavery— this 
and more the dark column tells in the most masterly narrative relief in sculp- 
tural history. These artists and their employers were not chauvinists; they 
showed Trajan’s acts of clemency, but also they revealed the heroic aspects 
of a nation’s struggle for freedom; and the finest figure in the scroll is the 
Dacian king. It is a strange document, too crowded for full effectiveness; 
some figures so crude that one wonders if a Dacian warrior carved them; 
superposition primitively substituted for perspective; and the whole ob- 
servable, like Pheidias’ frieze, only by some skylark scomer of the ground. 
But it was an interesting deviation from a classic style whose placidity had 
never expressed the overwhelming energy of the Roman character. Its 
“method of continuity” “—making each scene melt into the next— carried 
on the suggestions of Titus’ arch and prepared for medieval reliefs. Despite 
its defects the spiral story was imitated again and again, from the column of 
Aurelius in Rome, and that of Arcadius in Constantinople, to the Napoleonic 
shaft in the Place Vendee in Paris. 

Trajan completed his building program by finishing in the grand manner 
the baths begun by Domitian. Meanwhile six years of peace had wearied 
him; administration was a task that did not awaken his reserv^e energies as war 
did; he did not feel alive in a palace. Why not take up Caesar’s plans where 
Antony had failed, settle the Parthian question once and for all, establish 



CHAP.XIX) THE PHILOSOPHER KINGS 413 

a more strategic frontier in the East, and capture control of the trade routes 
across Armenia and Parthia to Central Asia, the Persian Gulf, and India? 

After careful preparation he set out again with his legions ( 1 1 3 ) . A year 
later he had taken Armenia; yet another year and he had marched down 
through Mesopotamia, captured Ctesiphon, and reached the Indian Ocean— 
the first and last Roman general to stand before that sea. The population at 
home learned geography by following his victories; the Senate was amused 
to be informed, almost weekly, of another nation conquered or hastUy sub- 
mitting: the Bosporus, Colchis, Asiatic Iberia, Asiatic Albania, Osrhoene, 
Messenia, Media, Assyria, Arabia Petrea, at last even Parthia. Parthia, Ar- 
menia, Assyria, and Mesopotamia were constituted provinces, and the new 
Alexander had the glory of naming and crowning a client king over the 
ancient enemies of Rome. Standing on the shores of the Red Sea, Trajan 
mourned that he was too old to repeat the Macedonian’s advance to the 
Indus. He contented himself with building a Red Sea fleet to control the 
passage and commerce to India; left garrisons at all strategic points, and 
turned back reluctantly toward Rome. 

Like Antony he had gone too fast and too far and had neglected to con- 
solidate his victories and his lines. On reaching Antioch he was informed 
that the Parthian king Osroes, whom he had deposed, had gathered another 
army and had reconquered central Mesopotamia; that rebellion had broken 
out in all the new provinces; that the Jews of Mesopotamia, Egypt, and 
Cyrene were in revolt; and that disaffection was flaring up in Libya, Maure- 
tania, and Britain, The old warrior wished to take the field again, but his flesh 
refused. He had worn himself out by living as actively in the hot East as in 
the West; dropsy set in, and a paralytic stroke left the great will helpless in a 
broken frame. Sadly he commissioned Lucius Quietus to put down the up- 
risings in Mesopotamia, sent Marcius Turba to suppress the Jews in Africa, 
and left his nephew Hadrian in command of the main Roman army in Syria. 
He had himself carried down to the Cilician coast, hoping to sail thence to 
Rome, where the Senate was preparing for him the greatest triumph since 
Augustus. He died at Selinus on the way (117), aged sixty-four, after a 
reign of nineteen years. His ashes were taken to the capital, and were buried 
under the great column that he had chosen as his tomb. 

III. HADRIAN 

1. The Rtiler 

Probably we shall never know whether the most brilliant of the Roman 
emperors won his throne by amorous connivance or by Trajan’s conviction 



CAESAR AND CHRIST 


414 


(chap. XIX 


of his worth. “His appointment,” says Dio Cassius, “was due to the fact that 
when Trajan died without an heir, his widow Plotina, who was in love with 
Hadrian, conspired to secure him the succession.” Spartianus repeats the 
story Plotina and Hadrian denied the rumor, which nevertheless persisted 
to the end of his reign. He settled the matter by distributing a generous dona- 
tive among the troops. 

Pubhus Aelius Hadrianus traced his cognomen and family to the town of 
Adria, on the Adriatic coast; thence, said his autobiography, his ancestors had 
migrated to Spain. The same Spanish town, Italica, that had seen the birth 
of Trajan in 52 saw that of his nephew Hadrian in 76. When the boy’s father 
died (86) he was placed under the guardianship of Trajan and Caelius At- 
tianus. The latter tutored him and instilled in him so warm a fondness for 
Greek literature that the youth was nicknamed Graeculus. He studied also 
sin g ing , music, medicine, mathematics, painting, and sculpture, and later 
dabbled in half a dozen arts. Trajan called him to Rome (91) and gave him 
his niece in marriage (100). Vivia Sabina, as preserved in portrait busts that 
may have idealized her, was a woman of distinguished and conscious beauty, 
in whom Hadrian found no lasting happiness. Possibly he loved dogs and 
horses too keenly, and spent too much time hunting with them, and building 
tombs for them when they died. Perhaps he was unfaithful, or seemed so. 
In any case, she bore him no children, and though she accompanied him on 
many of his travels, they lived in lifelong estrangement. He showed her 
every favor and courtesy, and gave her every kindness but affection. When 
Suetonius, one of his secretaries, spoke disrespectfully of her he dismissed 
him. 

Hadrian’s first decision as emperor was to revise the imperialistic policy 
of his uncle. He had counseled Trajan against the Parthian expedition as too 
great an expenditure of men and means so soon after the Dacian W ars, and as 
promising, at best, gains difficult to hold; and Trajan’s generals, eager for 
glory, had never pardoned his opposition. Now he withdrew the legions 
from Armenia, Assyria, Mesopotamia, and Parthia, made Armenia a client 
kingdom instead of a province, and accepted the Euphrates as the eastern 
boundary of the Empire; he played Augustus to Trajan’s Caesar, and con- 
sohdated with peaceful administration as much as he could of the un- 
precedented realm that reckless arms had won. The generals who had led 
Trajan’s forces— Palma, Celsus, Quietus, Nigrinus— thought this policy 
cowardly and unwise; to cease to attack, they felt, was merely to defend, 
and merely to defend was to begin to die. W’hile Hadrian was with his 
legions on the Danube the Senate announced that the four generals had been 
detected in a conspiracy to overthrow the government and had been exe- 
cuted by the Senate’s orders. Rome was shocked to find that the men had 



CHAP.XIX) THE PHILOSOPHER KINGS 415 

received no trial; and though Hadrian, returning hurriedly to Rome, pro- 
tested that he had had nothing to do with the matter, no one believed him. 
He vowed to put no senator to death except at the Senate’s bidding, dis- 
tributed a gift of money among the people, amused them with abundant 
games, canceled tax arrears to the amount of 900,000,000 sesterces, publicly 
burned the tax records in a fiscal auto-da-fe, and for twenty years governed 
with wisdom, justice, and peace. But his unpopularity remained complete. 

His ancient biographer describes him as tall and elegant, with hair curled, 
and “a full beard to hide the natural blemishes of his face”;^* thenceforth all 
Rome wore beards. He was strongly built and kept himself in vigor by fre- 
quent exercise, above all by hunting; on several occasions he killed a lion 
with his own hands.^® So many elements were mingled in him that description 
is baffled. We are told that he was “stem and cheerful, humorous and grave, 
sensual and cautious, hard and hberal, severe and merciful, deceptively 
simple, and always in all things various.” He had a quick, impartial, skepti- 
cal and penetrating mind, but he respected tradition as the connective tissue 
of generations. He read and admired the Stoic Epictetus, but he sought pleas- 
ure with shamelessness and taste. He was irreligious and superstitious, laughed 
at oracles, played with magic and astrology, encouraged the national faith, 
and sedulously performed the duties of pontifex maximus. He was courteous 
and obstinate, sometimes cruel, usually kind; perhaps his contradictions were 
merely adaptations to circumstance. He visited the sick, helped the unfor- 
tunate, extended existing charities to orphans and widows, and was a gener- 
ous patron to artists, writers, and philosophers. He was a good singer, dancer, 
and harpist, a competent painter, a middling sculptor. He wrote several 
volumes— a grammar, an autobiography, poems decent and indecent,^'' in 
Latin and Greek. He preferred Greek to Latin literature, and old Cato’s 
simple Latin to Cicero’s smooth eloquence; under his example many authors 
now affected an archaic style. He organized the state-paid professors into a 
university, paid them well, and built for them a magnificent Athenaeum to 
rival the Museum of Alexandria. It delighted him to gather scholars and 
thinkers about him, to puzzle them with questions, and laugh at their con- 
tradictions and disputes. Favorinus of Gaul was the wisest of this philosophic 
court; when his friends rallied him for yielding to Hadrian in argument, he 
answered that any man with thirty legions behind him must be right.^® 

Along with these multiple intellectual interests went an unerring sense for 
the practical. Following Domitian’s lead, Hadrian reduced his freedmen to 
subordinate functions, chose businessmen of tried ability to administer the 
government, and formed from them and senators and jurists a concilium to 
meet in regular sessions for the consideration of policies. He appointed an 



4i6 CAESAR AND CHRIST (CHAP. XIX 

advocatus fisci, or Attorney for the Treasury, to detect corruption or deceit 
in the payment of taxes, with the illuminating result that while taxes re- 
mained as before, revenues were decidedly increased. He himself kept watch 
on each department and, like Napoleon, astonished its heads by detailed 
knowledge of their field. “His memory was vast,” says Spartianus; “he 
wrote, dictated, listened, and conversed with his friends, all at the same 
time” ^®-though the frequency of this tale invites suspicion. Under his care, 
and with the help of an extended civil service, the Empire was probably 
better governed than ever before or afterward. The price of this zealous 
order was a swelling bureaucracy, and a “mania of regulation’ that moved 
the principate still closer to absolute monarchy. Hadrian observed all the 
forms of co-operation with the Senate; nevertheless, his appointees and their 
executive orders encroached more and more upon the functions of what had 
once seemed “an assembly of kings.” He was too close to his problems to 
foresee that his efficient but prohferating bureaucracy might become in time 
an unbearable burden upon the taxpayers. On the contrary, he believed that 
within the framework of law and ordinance which his government had 
established every person in the Empire would find career open to talent and 
any man could rise rapidly from class to class. 

His clear and logical mind resented the chaos of accumulated, obscure, 
and contradictory laws. He commissioned Julianus to co-ordinate the enact- 
ments of past praetors into a Perpetual Edict, and encouraged further codifi- 
cations that paved the way for Justinian. He acted as a supreme court both 
in Rome and on his journeys, and earned the reputation of a fair and learned 
judge, always as lenient as the reign of law would permit. He issued innu- 
merable decrees, usually in favor of the weak against the strong, the slave 
against the master, the small farmer against the large estate, the tenant against 
the landlord, the consumer against the deceptions of retailers and the multi- 
plication of middlemen.^** He rejected accusations for vraiestas, refused be- 
quests from parents, or persons unknown to him, and ordered a tolerant 
application of the laws against Christians.’^ By his own example on state 
lands he encouraged the practice of emphyteusis (“implanting”), by which 
owners rented rough acres to tenants to be planted with orchards and remain 
rent-free till fruit grew. He was not a radical reformer; he was only a superla- 
tive administrator seeking, within the limits and inequalities of human na- 
ture, the greatest good of the whole. He preserved old forms, but he quietly 
poured new content into them according to the needs of the time. Once, 
when his passion for administration flagged, he refused audience to a peti- 
tioning woman ivith the plea, “I haven’t time.” “Don’t be emperor, then,” 
she cried. He granted her a hearing.^ 









CHAP. XIX) 


THE PHILOSOPHER KINGS 


417 


2. The Wanderer 

Unlike his predecessors Hadrian was as interested in the Empire as in the 
capital. Following the wholesome precedent of Augustus, he decided to 
visit every province, examining its conditions and needs and alleviating them 
with the expedition and resources available to an emperor. He was curious, 
too, about the ways and arts, dress and beliefs, of the diverse peoples in his 
realm; he wished to see the famous places of Greek history, to steep himself 
in that Hellenic culture which was the background and adornment of his 
mind. “He loved,” says Fronto, “not only to govern, but to perambulate, the 
world.” In 1 2 1 he set out from Rome, accompanied not by the pomp and 
trappings of royalty, but by experts, architects, builders, engineers, and 
artists. He went first to Gaul and “came to the relief of all the communities 
with various acts of generosity.” He passed into Germany and astonished 
everyone by the thoroughness with which he inspected the defenses of the 
Empireiagainst its future destroyers. He reorganized, extended and improved 
the limes between the Rhine and the Danube. A man of peace, he knew the 
arts of war and was resolved that his pacific temper should neither weaken 
his armies nor misguide his enemies. He issued severe regulations to maintain 
military discipline and obeyed these rules while visiting the camps; there he 
lived the life of the soldiers, eating their fare, never using a vehicle, walking 
with full equipment twenty miles on a march, and showing such endurance 
that no one could have guessed that he was at heart a scholar and a philoso- 
pher. At the same time he rewarded excellence, raised the legal and economic 
status of the legionaries, gave them better weapons and ample supplies, and 
relaxed the discipline of their free hours, merely insisting that their amuse- 
ments should not unfit them for their tasks. The Roman army was never in 
better condition than in his reign. 

He now traveled down the Rhine to its mouth and sailed across to Britain 
(122). We are not informed of his activities there, except that he ordered a 
wall built from the Solway Firth to the mouth of the Tyne “to divide the 
barbarians from the Romans.” Returning to Gaul he passed leisurely through 
Avignon, Nimes, and other towns of the provmcia, and settled down for the 
winter at Tarragona in northern Spain. While he was strolling alone in the 
gardens of his host a slave rushed upon him with drawn sword and tried to 
kill him. Hadrian overpowered him and quietly handed him over to the 
servants, who found that he was insane. 

In the spring of 123 he led some legions against the Moors of northwest 
Africa, who had been raiding the Roman towns of Mauretania. Having de- 
feated them and driven them back into their hills, he took ship for Ephesus. 



CAESAR AND CHRIST 


418 


(chap. XIX 


After wintering there he visited the cities of Asia Minor, listening to peti- 
tions and complaints, punishing malfeasance, rewarding competence, and 
providing money, designs, and workmen for municipal temples, baths, and 
theaters. Cyzicus, Nicaea, and Nicomedia had suffered a severe earthquake; 
Hadrian had the damage made good by imperial funds, and built at Cyzicus 
a temple that was at once ranked among the seven wonders of the world.^® 
He pushed eastward along the Euxine to Trapezus, ordered the governor of 
Cappadocia— the historian Arrian— to examine and report to him the condi- 
tion of all the ports on the Black Sea, moved southwest through Paphlagonia, 
and spent a winter at Pergamum. In the fall of 125 he sailed to Rhodes and 
thence to Athens. He passed a happy winter there and then turned home- 
ward. Still curious at fifty, he stopped in Sicily, and climbed Mt. Etna to see 
the sunrise from a perch 1 1,000 feet above the sea. 

It is worthy of note that he could leave his capital for five years and trust 
to his subordinates to carry on; like a good manager, he had organized and 
trained an almost automatic government. He stayed in Rome something 
more than a year. But the lust for travel was in his blood, and so much of the 
world remained to rebuild! In 128 he set out again, this time to Utica, Car- 
thage, and the flourishing new cities of northern Africa. Returning to Rome 
in the fall, he left soon afterward and spent another winter in Athens (128- 
29). He was made archon, presided happily at games and festivals, and en- 
joyed being called Liberator, Helios, Zeus, and Savior of the World. He 
mingled with philosophers and artists, imitating the graces, without the fol- 
lies, of Nero and Antony. Distressed by the free chaos of Athens’ laws, he 
commissioned a corps of jurists to codify them. Always skeptically inter- 
ested in religion, he had himself initiated into the Eleusinian mysteries. Find- 
ing Athens beset with unemployment, and resolved to restore the city to 
the splendor of Periclean days, he summoned architects, enmneers, and 
skilled artisans, and began a building program more extensive than his public 
works in Rome. In a square enclosed by an extensive colonnade his workmen 
raised a library with marble walls, 1 20 columns, a gilded roof, and spacious 
rooms sparkling with alabaster, paintings, and statuary. They built a gym- 
nasium, an aqueduct, a temple to Hera, and another to Zeus Panhellenicos— 
god of ah the Greeks. The most ambitious of these architectural under- 
takings was the completion ( 1 3 1 ) of the Olympieum-that lordly temple to 
Zeus the Olympian which Peisistratus had begun six centuries before and 
Antiochus Epiphanes had failed to finish. When Hadrian left Athens it was 
a cleaner, more prosperous, and more beautiful city than ever before in its 
history.^® 

In the spring of 1 29 he sailed to Ephesus and traveled again in Asia Minor, 
spaxvning buildings and cities as he went. He sallied into Cappadocia and re- 



THE PHILOSOPHER KINGS 


419 


CHAP. XIX) 

viewed the garrisons there. At Antioch he provided funds for an aqueduct, 
a temple, a theater, and public baths. In the fall he visited Palmyra and Arabia, 
and in 1 3 o he i oumeyed to J erusalem. The Holy City was still in ruins, almost 
as Titus had left it sixty years before; a handful of destitute Jews lived in lairs 
and hovels amid the rocks. Hadrian’s heart was touched by the desolation; 
and his imagination was moved by the empty site. He had hoped, by his 
restoration of Greece and the Hellenistic East, to raise higher than before 
the barriers between Greco-Roman civilization and the Oriental world; now 
he dreamed of transforming Zion itself into a pagan citadel. He ordered that 
Jerusalem should be rebuilt as a Roman colony and renamed Aeha Capitolina 
in memory of Hadrian’s gens and Jupiter’s Capitol in Rome. It was an aston- 
ishing error of psychology and statesmanship in one of the wisest statesmen 
in history. 

He passed on to Alexandria (130), smiled tolerantly at its disputatious 
populace, enriched the Museum, rebuilt Pompey’s tomb, and then, surpassing 
Caesar, abandoned himself to a leisurely sail up the Nile with his wife Sabina 
and his beloved Antinoiis. He had come upon the young Greek some years 
before in Bithynia; he had been stirred by the youth’s rounded beauty, soft 
eyes, and curly head; he had made him his favored page and had formed for 
him a tender and passionate attachment. Sabina made no protest that has 
come down to us, but the gossip of the cities assumed that the boy played 
Ganymede to the new Zeus; possibly, however, the childless Emperor loved 
him as a heaven-sent son. Now, at the height of Hadrian’s happiness, An- 
tinoiis, still but eighteen, died— apparently by drowning in the Nile. The 
monarch of the world “wept like a woman,” says Spartianus; he ordered a 
temple to be raised on the shore, buried the lad there, and offered him to the 
world as a god. Around the shrine he built a city, Antinoopolis. destined to 
be a Byzantine capital. While Hadrian returned sadly to Rome, legend began 
to remold the story: the Emperor, it said, had learned by magic divination 
that his greatest plans would succeed only if that which he loved most should 
die; Antinoiis had heard of the prophecy and had gone voluntarily to his 
death. Perhaps the legend formed soon enough to embitter Hadrian’s de- 
clining years. 

Back in Rome (131), he could feel that he had made the Empire better 
than he had found it. Never before, not even under Augustus, had it been so 
prosperous, and never has the Mediterranean world reached that fullness of 
life again; never has it again been the home of so advanced a civilization so 
■widely spread and so deeply shared. And no man had so beneficently ruled it 
as Hadrian. Augustus had thought of the provinces as a lucrative appendage 
to Italy, to be husbanded for Italy’s sake; now for the first time the ideas of 
Caesar and Claudius reached fulfillment, and Rome became not a tax col- 



420 


CAESAR AND CHRIST 


(chap. XIX 

lector for Italy, but the responsible administrator of a realm in which all 
parts alike received the care of the government, and in which the Greek 
spirit ruled the East and the mind as openly as the Roman spirit ruled the 
state and the West. Hadrian had seen it all and had made it one. He had 
promised that he “would manage the commonwealth as conscious that it was 
the people’s property, not his own”;^^ and he had kept his promise. 


3 . The Builder 

Only one thing remained— to make Rome, too, more beautiful than before. 
The artist in Hadrian was ever competing with the governor; he rebuilt the 
Pantheon while reorganizing Roman law. No other man ever built so plenti- 
fully, no other ruler so directly. The structures erected for him were some- 
times designed by him, and were always subject to his expert inspection as 
they progressed. He had a hundred edifices repaired or restored and in- 
scribed his name on none of them. Rome in all quarters benefited from his 
rare union of wisdom with power. Si jeimesse savait et vieillesse pouvait was 
in him a riddle solved. 

His most famous reconstruction was the Pantheon— the best-preserved 
building of the ancient world. The rectangular temple reared by Agrippa 
had been destroyed by fire; apparently only the frontal Corinthian portico 
remained. North of this remnant Hadrian had his architects and engineers 
raise a circular temple, in the most indigenous of Roman styles. His Hellenic 
tastes inclined him to prefer Greek to Roman forms in the architecture of his 
capital. The new temple did not form with the portico a harmonious whole; 
but the interior— a circle 132 feet in diameter, with no impeding supports— 
gave a sense of space and freedom equaled only by the Gothic cathedrals. 
The walls were twenty feet thick, of brick externally faced in the lower 
section with marble, in the rest with stucco relieved by pilasters. The ceiling 
of the portico was of bronze plates so thick that when they were removed by 
Pope Urban VIII they sufficed to cast 1 10 cannon and to form the baldachin 
over the high altar in St. Peter s."® The massive bronze doors were originally 
covered with gold. Sev£n niches were cut into the lower section of the win- 
dowless interior wall and were adorned with lofty marble columns and 
entablatures; once these niches served as alcoves for statuary, now they are 
modest chapels in a magnificent church. A higher section of the wall was 
plated with panels of costly stone, separated by pillars of porphyry. The 
coffered dome, rising inward from the top of the walls, w^as the supreme 
triumph of Roman engineering. It w'‘as erected by pouring concrete into 
ribbed sections and letting the whole congeal into one solid mass. Its mono- 



CHAP.XIX) THE PHILOSOPHER KINGS 42 1 

lithic character did away with lateral thrust, but to make security doubly 
sure the architect built buttresses into the walls. At the top of the dome an 
opening (the oculus, or “eye”), twenty-six feet in diameter, gave the interior 
its sole and sufficient illumination. From this majestic dome, the largest in 
history, an architectural lineage descends through Byzantine and Roman- 
esque variations to the dome of St. Peter’s, and to that of the Capitol in 
Washington. 

Probably Hadrian himself designed the double-apsed temple to Venus 
and Roma which rose opposite the Colosseum, for legend tells how he sent 
his plans for it to Apollodorus and had the old architect put to death for 
returning a scornful comment.®® The temple was notable in several particu- 
lars; it was the largest in Rome; it had two cellas, one for each of its gods, 
who sat back to back on incommunicative thrones; and its vaulted roof of 
gold-plated bronze tiles was among the most brilliant sights of the city. For 
himself the Emperor built a yet ampler home— the villa whose remains still 
draw visitors to the pleasant suburb known to him as Tibur, to us as Tivoli. 
There, in an estate seven miles in circumference, rose a palace with every 
variety of room, and gardens so crowded with famous works of art that 
every major museum in Europe has enriched itself from the ruins. The 
designer showed here the usual Roman indifference to symmetry; he added 
building to building as need or fancy prompted, and made no greater at- 
tempt at harmony than we find in the architectural chaos of the Forum; 
perhaps the Romans, like the Japanese, were tired of symmetry and pleased 
with the surprises of irregularity. Besides porticoes, libraries, temples, a 
theater, a music hall, and a hippodrome, the profuse architect added small 
replicas of Plato’s Academy, Aristotle’s Lyceum, and Zeno’s Stoa— as if the 
Emperor, amid all this vain wealth, would make some amends to philosophy. 

The villa was finished in the last years of Hadrian’s life. We do not know 
that he found happiness there. The revolt of the Jews in 1 3 5 embittered him; 
he put it down without mercy and fretted that he could not end his reign 
without war. In that same year, still only fifty-nine, he was stricken with a 
painful and wasting illness— akin to tuberculosis and dropsy— which slowly 
crushed his body, his spirit, and his mind. His temper became sharper, his 
manner querulous; he suspected his oldest friends of conspiring to kill and 
replace him; at last— perhaps in an illucid interval, and how justly we cannot 
say— he ordered that several of them should be put to death. 

To end the war of succession that was forming in his court, he adopted as 
heir his friend Lucius Verus. When, soon after, Lucius died, Hadrian called 
to his bedside at Tibur a man with an unblemished reputation for integrity 
and wisdom, Titus Aurelius Antoninus, and adopted him as his son and suc- 
cessor, Looking far ahead, he advised Antoninus to adopt in turn, and edu- 



CAESAR AND CHRIST 


422 


(chap. XIX 


cate for government, two youths then growing up at the court: Marcus 
Annius Verus, then seventeen, and Lucius Aehus Verus, then eleven, respec- 
tively the nephew of Antoninus and the son of Lucius Verus. The title of 
Caesar, heretofore borne by the emperors and their agnatic descendants, was 
conferred by Hadrian upon Antoninus; and thereafter, while the emperors 
kept for themselves the title of Augustus, they granted the name Caesar to 
each heir presumptive to the throne. 

Hadrian’s sickness and sufferings had now increased; blood often gushed 
from his nostrils; and in his distress he began to long for death. He had 
already prepared his own tomb beyond the Tiber— that huge mausoleum 
whose gloomy remains are today the Castel Sant’ Angelo, still reached by 
the Pons Aelius that Hadrian built. He was impressed by the example of the 
Stoic philosopher Euphrates, then in Rome, who, weary with illness and 
old age, asked Hadrian’s permission to kill himself and, receiving it, drank 
hemlock.®^ The Emperor begged for poison or a sword, but no attendant 
would accommodate him. He bade a Danubian slave stab him, but the slave 
fled; he commanded his physician to poison him, but the physician com- 
mitted suicide.®^ He found a dagger and was about to kill himself when it 
was taken from him. He mourned that he, who had the power to put anyone 
to death, was not himself permitted to die. Dismissing his doctors, he with- 
drew to Baiae and deliberately fed on foods and drinks that would hasten his 
end. At last, exhausted and maddened with pain, he died (138), after sixty- 
two years of life and twenty-one of rule. He left behind him a little poem 
that expressed like Dante the sadness of recalling in grief the days of our 
happiness: 

Animula vagula, blandula. Soul of mine, pretty one, flitting one, 
Hospes comesque corporis. Guest and parmer of my clay. 

Quae nunc abibis in loca. Whither wilt thou hie away— 

Pallidula, rigida, nudula. Pallid one, rigid one, naked one, 

Nec ut soles dabis iocos? Never to play again, never to play?®* 


rv. ANTONINUS PIUS 

Of Antoninus there is no history, for he had almost no faults and com- 
mitted no crimes. His ancestors had come from Nimes two generations be- 
fore, and his family was one of the wealthiest in Rome. Reaching the throne 
at fifty-one, he gave the Empire the most equitable, and not the least efficient, 
government it would ever have. 

He was the most fortunate man that ever wore a crown. We are told that 
he was tall and handsome, healthy and serene, gentle and resolute, modest and 



CHAP.XIX) THE PHILOSOPHER KINGS 423 

omnipotent, eloquent and a despiser of rhetoric, popular and immune to flat- 
tery. If we are.to believe his adopted son Marcus we should have to reject 
him as “that faultless monster whom the world ne’er knew.” The Senate 
called him Fius as a model of the milder Roman virtues, and Optimus Prmceps 
as the best of princes. He had no enemies and hundreds of friends. But he 
was not unacquainted with grief. His elder daughter died as he was setting 
out as proconsul to Asia; his younger daughter proved a dubious wife to 
Aurehus; and scandal accused his own wife of being as faithless as she was 
beautiful. Antoninus bore these rumors silently; and after Faustina’s death 
he established in her name and honor a fund for the support and education 
of girls and raised to her memory one of the lovehest temples in the Forum. 
He did not marry again, lest he mar the happiness and inheritance of his 
children, but contented himself with a concubine. 

He was not a man of intellect in the narrower sense of that term. He had 
no learning and looked with an aristocrat’s indulgence upon men of letters, 
philosophy, or art; nevertheless, he helped such men richly and invited them 
often to his home. He preferred religion to philosophy, worshiped the old 
gods with apparent sincerity, and gave his adopted sons an example of piety 
that Marcus never forgot. “Do everything as a disciple of Antoninus,” 
Marcus bade himself; “remember his constancy in every reasonable act, his 
evenness in all things, his piety, and the serenity of his countenance, and his 
disregard of empty fame . . . with how little he was satisfied; how laborious 
and patient, how religious without superstition.” Yet he was tolerant of 
non-Roman creeds, moderated Hadrian’s measures against the Jews, and 
continued his predecessor’s lenience toward the Christians. He was no kill- 
joy; he loved a jest and made many a good one; he played, fished, and hunted 
with his friends, and from his behavior none could have guessed that he was 
emperor. He preferred the quiet of his villa at Lanuvium to the luxury of 
his official palace and nearly always spent the evenings in the intimacy of 
his family. When he inherited the throne he put aside all thought of that 
careless ease to which he had looked forward as the consolation of old age. 
Perceiving that his wife anticipated increased splendor he reproved her: “Do 
you not understand that we have now lost what we had before? ” He knew 
that he had succeeded to the cares of the world. 

He began his reign by pouring his immense personal fortune into the 
imperial treasury. He canceled arrears of taxes, made gifts of money to the 
citizens, paid for many festival games, and relieved scarcities of wine, oil, 
and wheat by buying these and distributing them free. He carried on, but 
with moderation, the building program of Hadrian in Italy and the prov- 
inces. Yet he managed the national finances so ably that at his death the 



424 CAESAR AND CHRIST (cHAP. XIX 

combined treasuries of the state had 2,700,000,000 sesterces. He gave a 
public accounting of all his receipts and expenditures. He behaved toward 
the Senate as merely one of it and never took important measures without 
consulting its leaders. He devoted himself to the chores of administration as 
well as to problems of policy; “he cared for all men and all things as his 
own.” He continued Hadrian’s liberalization of the law, equalized the 
penalties of adultery for men and women, deprived ruthless masters of their 
slaves, restricted the torture of slaves in trials, and decreed severe punish- 
ment for any owner who killed a slave. He encouraged education with state 
funds, provided for the education of poor children, and extended to recog- 
nized teachers and philosophers many privileges of the Senatorial class. 

He ruled the provinces as well as he could without traveling. In all his long 
reign he was never absent for a day from Rome or its environs. He was con- 
tent to appoint to provincial governorships men of tried competence and 
honor. He was anxious to keep the Empire safe without war; “he was con- 
tinually quoting the saying of Scipio, that he would rather save a single 
citizen than slay a thousand foes.” He had to wage some minor wars in 
order to suppress revolts in Dacia, Achaea, and Egypt, but he left these tasks 
to subordinates and was satisfied with Hadrian’s cautious frontiers. Some 
tribes in Germany interpreted his mildness as weakness and perhaps were 
encouraged by it to prepare those invasions which rocked the Empire after 
his death; this is the one flaw in his statesmanship. For the rest the provinces 
were happy under him and accepted the Empire as the only alternative to 
chaos and strife. They showered him with petitions, which he almost always 
granted; and they could rely upon him to repair the ravages of any public 
calamity. Provincial authors— Strabo, Philo, Plutarch, Appian, Epictetus, 
Aelius Aristides— sang the praises of the pax Komana; and Appian assures us 
that he had seen at Rome the envoys of foreign states vainly asking admission 
for their countries to the boons of the Roman yoke.®® Never had monarchy 
left men so free, or so respected the rights of its subjects.®® “The world’s ideal 
seemed to have been attained. Wisdom reigned, and for twenty-three years 
the world was governed by a father.” 

It only remained for Antoninus to crown a good life with a peaceful death. 
In his seventy-fourth year he fell sick of a stomach disturbance and was 
seized with a high fever. He called Marcus Aurelius to his bedside and com- 
mitted to him the care of the state. He instructed his servants to transfer to 
Marcus’ room the golden statue of Fortuna that had for many years stood 
in the bedchamber of the Prince. To the officer of the day he gave as watch- 
word aequanimitas; soon afterward he turned as if to sleep, and died (161). 
All classes and cities vied with one another in honoring his memory. 



CHAP. XIX) 


THE PHILOSOPHER KINGS 


425 


V. THE PHILOSOPHER AS EMPEROR 

Antoninus, said Renan, “would have been without competition for the 
reputation of being the best of sovereigns, had he not designated Marcus 
Aurelius as his heir.” “If,” said Gibbon, “a man were called upon to fix 
the period in the history of the world during which the condition of the 
human race was most happy and prosperous, he would without hesitation 
name that which elapsed from the accession of Nerva to the death of Aure- 
lius. Their united reigns are possibly the only period of history in which the 
happiness of a great people was the sole object of government.” 

Marcus Annius Verus was bom in Rome in 12 1. The Annii had come a 
century before from Succubo, near Cordova; there, it seems, their honesty 
had won them the cognomen V enis, “trae.” Three months after the boy’s 
birth his father died, and he was taken into the home of his rich grandfather, 
then consul. Hadrian was a frequent visitor there; he took a fancy to the 
boy and saw in him the stuff of kings. Seldom has any lad had so propitious a 
youth, or so keenly appreciated his good fortune. “To the gods,” he wrote 
fifty years later, “I am indebted for having good grandparents, good parents, 
a good sister, good teachers, good kinsmen and friends, nearly everything 
good”;^® time struck a balance by giving him a questionable wife and a 
worthless son. His Meditations lists the virtues these people had, and the 
lessons he received from them in modesty, patience, manliness, abstemious- 
ness, piety, benevolence, and “a simplicity of life far removed from the 
habits of the rich”^^— though wealth surrounded him on every side. 

Never was a boy so persistently educated. He was attached in boyhood to 
the service of temples and priests; he committed to memory every word of 
the ancient and unintelligible liturgy; and though philosophy later shook his 
faith, it never diminished his sedulous performance of the old exacting ritual. 
Marcus hked games and sports, even bird snaring and hunting, and some 
efforts were made to train his body as well as his mind and character. But 
seventeen tutors in childhood are a heavy handicap. Four grammarians, four 
rhetors, one jurist, and eight philosophers divided his soul among them. The 
most famous of these teachers was M. Cornelius Fronto, who taught him 
rhetoric. Though Marcus loved him, lavished upon him all the kindnesses of 
an affectionate and royal pupil, and exchanged with him letters of intimate 
charm, the youth turned his back upon oratory as a vain and dishonest art, 
and abandoned himself to philosophy. 

He thanks his instructors for sparing him logic and astrology, thanks 
Diognetus the Stoic for freeing him from superstition, Junius Rusticus for 
acquainting him with Epictetus, and Sextus of Chaeronea for teaching him 



426 CAESAR AND CHRIST (cHAP. XIX 

to live in conformity with nature. He is grateful to his brother Severus for 
teUing him about Brutus, Cato of Utica, Thrasea, and Helvidius; “from him 
I received the idea of a state in which there is the same law for all, a pohty of 
equal rights and freedom of speech, and the idea of a kingly government that 
most of all respects the freedom of the governed”;^® here the Stoic ideal of 
monarchy takes possession of the throne. He thanks Maximus for teaching 
him “self-government, and not to be led aside by anything; cheerfulness in 
all circumstances, and a just admixture of gentleness and dignity, and to do 
appointed tasks without complaining.” It is clear that the leading philoso- 
phers of the time were priests without religion rather than metaphysicians 
without hfe. Marcus took them so seriously that for a time he almost ruined 
a naturally weak constitution with ascetic devotions. At the age of twelve 
he took on the rude cloak of a philosopher, slept on a little straw strewn over 
the floor, and long resisted the entreaties of his mother to use a couch. He 
was a Stoic before he became a man. He offers thanks “that I preserved the 
flower of my youth; that I took not upon me to be a man before my time, 
but rather put it off longer than I needed . . . that I never had to do with 
Benedicta . , . and afterwards, when I fell into some fits of love, I was soon 
cured.” 

Two influences diverted him from professional philosophy and sanctity. 
One was the succession of minor poUtical offices to which he was appointed; 
the realism of an administrator was crossed with the idealism of a meditative 
youth. The other was his close association with Antoninus Pius. He did not 
fret at Antoninus’ longevity, but continued his hfe of stoic simplicity, 
philosophical study, and official duties, while living in the palace and serving 
his protracted apprenticeship; and the example of his adoptive father’s devo- 
tion and honesty in government became a powerful influence in his develop- 
ment. The name by which we know him, Aurelius, was the clan name of 
Antoninus, which both Marcus and Lucius, on their adoption, had taken as 
their own. Lucius became a gay man of the world, a graceful adept in the 
pleasures of hfe. When, in 146, Pius desired a colleague to share the govern- 
ment with him, he named Marcus only and left to Lucius the empire of love. 
On the death of Antoninus, Marcus became sole emperor; but remember- 
ing Hadrian’s wish, he at once made Lucius Verus his full collea<nie and 
gave him his daughter Lucilla in marriage. At the outset of his reign, as at 
the end, the philosopher erred through kindness. The division of rule was 
a bad precedent, which, in the heirs of Diocletian and Constantine, would 
divide and weaken the realm. 

Marcus asked the Senate to vote Pius divine honors, completed with 
perfect taste the temple that Pius had raised to his wife, and rededicated it 



CHAP.XIX) THE PHILOSOPHER KINGS 427 

to Antoninus and Faustina both.* He paid the Senate every courtesy and 
rejoiced to see that many of his philosopher friends had found their way into 
its membership. All Italy and all the provinces acclaimed him as Plato’s dream 
come true: the philosopher was king. But he had no thought of attempting 
a Utopia. Like Antoninus he was a conservative; radicals do not grow up in 
palaces. He was a philosopher-king in the Stoic rather than the Platonic 
sense. “Never hope,” he admonished himself, “to realize Plato’s Republic. 
Let it be sufficient that you have in some degree ameliorated mankind, and 
do not think such improvement a matter of small importance. Who can 
change the opinions of men? And without a change of sentiments what 
can you make but reluctant slaves and hypocrites?” He had discovered that 
not all men wished to be saints; and he sadly reconciled himself to a world 
of corruption and wickedness. “The immortal gods consent for countless 
ages to endure without anger, and even to surround with blessings, so many 
and such evil men; but thou, who hast so short a time to live, art thou already 
weary? ” He decided to rely on example rather than law. He made him- 
self in fact a public servant; he carried all the burdens of administration and 
judgment, even that part which Lucius had agreed to take but was neglect- 
ing; he allowed himself no luxury, treated all men with simple fellowship, 
and wore himself out by being easy of access. He was not a great states- 
man; he spent too much of the public funds in cash gifts to the people and 
the army, gave each member of the Praetorian Guard 20,000 sesterces, in- 
creased the number of those who could apply for free corn, provided fre- 
quent and costly games, and remitted large sums in unpaid taxes and 
tribute; it was generosity with many precedents, but unwise at a time when 
rebellion or war visibly threatened, or was breaking out, in several provinces 
and on far-spread frontiers. 

Marcus continued sedulously that reform of law which Hadrian had 
begun. He increased the number of court days and reduced the length of 
trials. He himself often sat as judge, inflexible against grave offenses, but 
usually merciful. He devised legal protection for wards against dishonest 
guardians, for debtors against creditors, for provinces against governors. 
He connived at the rejuvenation of the forbidden collegia, legalized those 
associations which were chiefly burial societies, made them legal persons 
eligible for bequests, and established a fund for the interment of poor 
citizens. He gave the alhnenta the widest extension in their history. After 
the death of his wife he created an endowment for the aid of young women; 
a pretty bas-relief shows us such girls crowding around the younger Faustina, 

• Its ten Corinthian monolithic columns are among the finest remains in the Forum. The 
portico is intact, and the cella, though shorn of its marble facing, has survived as the Church 
of San Lorenzo in Miranda. 



428 CAESAR AND CHRIST (CHAP. XIX 

who pours wheat into their laps. He abolished mixed bathing, forbade ex- 
travagant remuneration to actors and gladiators, restricted according to their 
wealth the expenditures of the cities on games, required the use of foiled 
weapons in gladiatorial contests, and did all that sanguinary custom would 
allow to banish death from the arena. The people loved him but not his laws. 
When he enlisted gladiators in his army for the Marcomannic Wars the popu- 
lace cried out in good-humored anger: “He is taking our amusement from 
us; he wants to force us to be philosophers.” Rome was preparing, but not 
quite ready, to be puritan. 

It was his misfortune that his fame as a philosopher, and the long peace 
under Hadrian and Antoninus, encouraged rebels within and barbarians 
without. In 162 revolt broke out in Britain, the Chatti invaded Roman Ger- 
many, and the Parthian king Vologases III declared war upon Rome. Marcus 
chose able generals to put down the revolt in the north, but he delegated 
to Lucius Verus the major task of fighting Parthia. Lucius got no farther 
than Antioch. For there hved Panthea, so beautiful and accomplished that 
Lucian thought all the perfections of all sculptural masterpieces had come 
together in her; to which were added a voice of intoxicating melody, fingers 
skilled on the lyre, and a mind enriched with literature and philosophy. 
Lucius saw her, and, like Gilgamesh, forgot when he was bom. He 
abandoned himself to pleasure, to hunting, at last to debauchery, while the 
Parthians rode into terror-stricjcen Syria. Marcus made no comment on 
Lucius but sent to Avidius Cassius, second in charge in Lucius’ army, a plan 
of campaign whose mihtary excellence helped the general’s own ability not 
only to drive the Parthians back across Mesopotamia, but to plant the Roman 
standards once more in Seleucia and Ctesiphon. This time the two cities were 
burned to the ground lest they serve again as bases for Parthian campaigns. 
Lucius returned from Antioch to Rome and was awarded a triumph, which 
he magnanimously insisted that Marcus should share. 

Lucius brought with him the invisible victor of the war— pestilence. It had 
appeared first among the troops of Avidius in captured Seleucia; it spread 
so rapidly that he withdrew his army into Mesopotamia, while the Parthians 
rejoiced at the vengeance of their gods. The retreating legions carried the 
plague with them to Syria; Lucius took some of these soldiers to Rome to 
march in his triumph; they infected every city through which they passed 
and every region of the Empire to which they were later assigned. The 
ancient historians tell us more of its ravages than of its nature; their descrip- 
tions suggest exanthematous typhus or possibly bubonic plague.®" Galen 
thought it similar to the disease that had wasted the Athenians under Pericles: 
in both cases black pustules almost covered the body, the victim was racked 
with a hoarse cough, and his “breath stank.” Rapidly it swept through 



CHAP.XIX) the philosopher kings 429 

Asia Minor, Egypt, Greece, Italy, arid Gaul; within a year (166-67) had 
killed more men than had been lost in the war. In Rome 2000 died of it in 
one day, including many of the aristocracy;®^ corpses were carried out of 
the city in heaps. Marcus, helpless before this intangible enemy, did all he 
could to mitigate the evil; but the medical science of his day could offer him 
no guidance, and the epidemic ran its course until it had established an 
immunity or had killed all its carriers. The effects were endless. Many locali- 
ties were so despoiled of population that they reverted to jungle or desert; 
food production fell, transport was disorganized, floods destroyed great 
quantities of grain, and famine succeeded plague. The happy hilaritas that 
had marked the beginning of Marcus’ reign vanished; men yielded to a be- 
wildered pessimism, flocked to soothsayers and oracles, clouded the altars 
with incense and sacrifice, and sought consolation where alone it was 
offered them— in the new religions of personal immortahty and heavenly 
peace. 

Amid these domestic difficulties news came (167) that the tribes along 
the Danube— Chatti, Quadi, Marcomanni, lazyges— had crossed the river, 
overwhelmed a Roman garrison of' 20,000 men, and were pouring un- 
hindered into Dacia, Raetia, Pannonia, Noricum; that some had made their 
way over the Alps, had defeated every army sent against them, were be- 
sieging Aquileia (near Venice), were threatening Verona, and were laying 
waste the rich fields of northern Italy. Never before had the German tribes 
moved with such unity or so closely threatened Rome. Marcus acted with 
surprising decisiveness. He put away the pleasures of philosophy and de- 
termined to take the field in what he foresaw would be the most momentous 
of Roman wars since Hannibal. He shocked Italy by enrolling policemen, 
gladiators, slaves, brigands, and barbarous mercenaries into legions depleted 
by war and pestilence. Even the gods were conscripted to his purpose: he 
bade the priests of alien faiths to offer sacrifice for Rome according to their 
various rites; and he himself burned such hecatombs at the altars that a wit 
circulated a message sent him by white oxen, begging him not to be too 
victorious; “if thou shouldst conquer, we are lost.” ®® To raise war funds 
without levying special taxes he auctioned off in the Forum the wardrobes, 
art objects, and jewels of the imperial palaces. He took careful measures of 
defense— fortified the border towns from Gaul to the Aegean, blocked the 
passes into Italy, and bribed German and Scythian tribes to attack the in- 
vaders in the rear. With energy and courage all the more admirable in a 
man who hated war, he trained his army into disciplined strength, led them 
through a hard campaign mapped out with strategic skill, drove the be- 
siegers from Aquileia, and routed them even to the Danube, until nearly 
all were captured or dead. 



CAESAR AND CHRIST 


430 


(chap, xtx 


He understood that this action had not ended the German danger; but 
thinking the situation safe for a time, he returned with his colleague to 
Rome. On the way Lucius died of an apoplectic stroke, and gossip, which, 
hke politics, has no bowels of mercy, whispered that Marcus had poisoned 
him . From January to September, 169, the Emperor rested at home from 
efforts that had strained his frail body close to the breaking point. He suf- 
fered from a stomach ailment that often left him too weak to talk; he con- 
trolled it by eating sparingly, one light meal a day. Those who knew his 
condition and his diet marveled at his labors in the palace and the field and 
could only say that he made up in resolution what he lacked in strength. 
On several occasions he called in the most famous physician of the age, 
Galen of Pergamum, and praised him for the unpretentious remedies he 
prescribed.®® 

Perhaps a succession of domestic disappointments co-operated with 
pohtical and military crises to aggravate his illness and make him old at forty- 
eight. His wife Faustina, whose pretty face has come down to us in many 
a sculptured portrait, may not have relished sharing bed and board with 
incarnate philosophy; she was a lively creature, who longed for a gayer life 
than his sober nature could give her. The talk of the town assumed her 
infidelity; the mimes satirized him as a cuckold and even named his rivals.®^ 
Like Antoninus with Faustina the mother, Marcus said nothing; instead, he 
promoted the supposed paramours to high office, gave Faustina every sign 
of tenderness and respect, had her deified when she died ( 1 7 5 ) , and thanked 
the gods, in his Meditations, for “so obedient and affectionate a wife.” ®® No 
evidence exists upon which to condemn her.®® Of the four children that she 
gave him— and whom he loved with a passion still warm in his letters to 
Fronto— one girl died in childhood; the sunfiving daughter was saddened by 
Lucius’ fife, and widowed by his death. Twin sons came in 16 1; one died 
at birth, the other was Commodus. Scandalmongers called him a gladiator’s 
gift to Faustina,®® and he strove all his fife long to confirm the tale. But he 
was a handsome and vigorous lad; Marcus forgivably doted on him, pre- 
sented him to the legions in a manner symbolic of naming a successor, and 
engaged the best teachers in Rome to fit him for rule. The youth preferred 
to model cups, dance, sing, hunt, and fence; he developed an understandable 
aversion to books, scholars, and philosophers, but enjoyed the company of 
gladiators and athletes. Soon he surpassed all comrades in lying, cruelty, 
and coarse speech. Marcus was too good to be great enough to discipline 
him or renounce him; he kept on hoping that education and responsibility 
would sober him and make him grow into a king. The lonely Emperor, 
emaciated, beard untended, eyes weary with anxiety and sleeplessness, 
turned back from his wife and son to the tasks of government and war. 



CHAP.XIX) THE PHILOSOPHER KINGS 43 1 

The assaults of the central European tribes against the frontier had 
stopped only for a breathing spell; in this struggle to destroy an Empire and 
make barbarism free, peace was but an armistice. In 169 the Chatti invaded 
the Roman regions of the upper Rhine. In 1 70 the Chauci attacked Belgica, 
and another force besieged Sarmizegetusa; the Ccstoboii crossed the Balkans 
into Greece and plundered the Temple of the Mysteries at Eleusis, fourteen 
miles from Athens; the Mauri or Moors invaded Spain from Africa, and a 
new tribe, the Longobardi or Lombards, made its first appearance on the 
Rhine. Despite a hundred defeats, the fertile barbarians were growing 
stronger, the barren Romans weaker. Marcus saw that it was now a war to 
the death, that one side must destroy the other or go under. Only a m an 
schooled in the Roman and Stoic sense of duty could have transformed 
himself so completely from a mystic philosopher into a competent and suc- 
cessful general. The philosopher remained, hidden under the imperator’s 
armor; in the very tumult of this Second Marcomannic War (169-75), iri 
his camp facing the Quadi on the river Granna,* Alarcus wrote that little 
book of Meditations by which the world chiefly remembers him. This 
glimpse of a frail and fallible saint, pondering the problems of morality and 
destiny while leading a great army in a conflict on which the fate of the 
Empire turned, is one of the most intimate pictures that time has preserved 
of its great men. Pursuing the Sarmatians by day he could write with sym- 
pathy of them at night: “A spider, when it has caught a fly, thinks it has 
done a great deed. So does one who has run down a hare ... or who has 
captured Sarmatians. . . . Are they not all alike robbers?” 

Nevertheless, he fought the Sarmatians, the Marcomanni, the Quadi, the 
lazyges, through six hard years, defeated them, and marched his legions as 
far north as Bohemia. It was apparently his plan to use the Hercynian and 
Carpathian ranges as a new frontier; if he had succeeded, Roman civilization 
might have made Germany, like Gaul, Latin in speech and classical in 
heritage. But at the height of his successes he was shocked to learn that 
Avidius Cassius, after putting down a revolt in Egypt, had declared himself 
emperor. Marcus surprised the barbarians with a hasty peace, merely annex- 
ing a ten-mile strip on the north bank of the Danube and leaving strong 
garrisons on the southern side. He summoned his soldiers, told them that he 
would gladly yield his place to Avidius if Rome wished it, promised to 
pardon the rebel, and marched into Asia to encounter him. Meanwhile a 
centurion killed Cassius, and the rebellion collapsed. Alarcus passed through , 
Asia Minor and Syria to Alexandria, mourning like Caesar that he had been 
cheated of a chance for clemency. At Smyrna, Alexandria, and Athens he 

* Probably the Gran, a tributary of the Danube. 



432 CAESAR AND CHRIST (CHAP. XIX 

walked the streets without a guard, wore the mantle of a philosopher, at- 
tended the lectures of the leading teachers, and joined with them in dis- 
cussion, speaking Greek. During his stay at Athens he endowed professor- 
ships in each of the great schools of doctrine— Platonic, Aristotelian, Stoic, 
and Epicurean. 

In the fall of 176, after almost seven years of war, Aurelius reached 
Rome and was accorded a triumph as the savior of the Empire. The Emperor 
associated Commodus with himself in the victory and now made him, a lad 
of fifteen, his colleague on the throne. For the first time in nearly a century 
the principle of adoption was put aside and the hereditary principate was 
resumed. Marcus knew what perils he was inviting for the Empire; he chose 
them as a lesser evil than the civil war that Commodus and his friends would 
wage if he were denied the throne. We must not judge him with hind- 
sight; neither did Rome anticipate the consequences of this love. There 
the plague had burned itself out, and men were beginning to be happy again. 
The capital had suffered little from the wars, which had been financed with 
remarkable economy and little extra taxation; while battle raged on the 
frontiers trade flourished within, and money jingled everywhere. It was the 
height of Rome’s tide and of its Emperor’s popularity; all the world ac- 
claimed him as at once a soldier, a sage, and a saint. 

But his triumph did not deceive him; he knew that the problem of Ger- 
many had not been solved. Convinced that further invasions could be pre- 
vented only by an active policy of extending the frontier to the mountains 
of Bohemia, he set forth with ^mmodus, in 178, on the Third Marcoman- 
nic War. Crossing the Danube, he again defeated the Quadi after a long 
and arduous campaign. No resistance remained, and he was about to annex 
the lands of the Quadi, the Marcomanni, and the Sarmatians (roughly Bo- 
hemia and Danubian Galicia) as new provinces, when sickness struck him 
down in his camp at Vindobona (Vienna). Feeling death’s hand, he called 
Commodus to his side and warned him to carry through the policy which 
was now so near fulfillment, and realize the dream of Augustus by pushing 
the boundary of the Empire to the Elbe.* Then he refused all further food 
or drink. On the sixth day he rose with his last strength and presented Com- 
modus to the army as the new emperor. Returning to his couch he covered 
his head with the sheet and soon afterward died. When his body reached 
Rome the people had already begun to worship him as a god who for a while 
had consented to live on the earth. 

• “We must not merely acknowledge the resolution and tenacity of the ruler,” says the 
impartial Mommsen, “but must also admit that he did what right policy enjoined.” 62 ^ 



CHAPTER XX 


Life and Thought in the 
Second Century 

.A.D. 96-196 


I. TACITUS 

T he policies of Nerva and Trajan liberated the suppressed mind of 
Rome, and gave to the literature of their reigns a note of fierce resent- 
ment against a despotism that had gone but might come again. Pliny’s Pane- 
gyric voiced it in welcoming the first of three great Spaniards to the throne; 
Juvenal seldom sang any other note; and Tacitus, the most brilUant of 
historians, became a delator temporis acti, an accuser of times past, and 
excoriated a century with his pen. 

We do not know the date or place of Tacitus’ birth, nor even his given 
name. Probably he was the son of Cornelius Tacitus, procurator of imperial 
revenue in Belgic Gaul; through this man’s advancement the family was 
raised from the equestrian class into the new aristocracy.^ Our first definite 
fact about the historian is his own statement: “Agricola, during his consul- 
ship (78) . . . agreed to a marriage between myself and his daughter, 
who might certainly have looked for a prouder connection.” ^ He had re- 
ceived the usual education, and had learned to the fuU those oratorical arts 
which enliven his style, that skill in pros and cons which marks the 
speeches in his histories. The younger Pliny often heard him in the courts, 
admired his “stately eloquence,” and acclaimed him as the greatest orator in 
Rome.® In 88 Tacitus was praetor; thereafter he sat in the Senate and con- 
fesses with shame ^ that he failed to speak out against tyranny, and joined 
in the Senatorial condemnation of Domitian’s Senatorial victims. Nerva 
made him consul (97), and Trajan appointed him proconsul of Asia. He 
was evidently a man of affairs and practical experience; his books were the 
afterthought of a full life, the product of a leisurely old age, and of a mature 
and profound mind. 

One theme unites them— hatred of autocracy. His Dialogue on Orators 
(if it is his) attributes the decline of eloquence to the suppression of hberty. 
His Agricola— th.& most perfect of those brief monographs to which the 

433 



434 CAESAR AND CHRIST (CHAP. XX 

ancients confined biography— proudly recounts the achievements of his 
father-in-law as general and governor, and then bitterly records Domitian’s 
dismissal and neglect of him. The little essay On the Situation and Origin of 
the Germans contrasts the virile virtues of a free people with the degenera- 
tion and cowardice of Romans under the despots. When Tacitus praises 
the Germans for considering infanticide an infamy, and giving no advantage 
to childlessness, he is not describing Germans but denouncing Romans. The 
philosophical purpose destroys the objectivity of the study, but allows a 
remarkable breadth of view in a Roman official praising the German power 
of resisting Rome.® * 

The success of these essays induced Tacitus to illustrate the evils of 
tyranny by indicting the record of the despots in ruthless detail. He began 
with what was freshest in his memory and in the testimony of his older 
friends— the period from Galba to the death of Dcmitian; and when these 
Historiae were acclaimed by a grateful aristocracy as the best historical 
writing since Livy, he continued his story a f route by describing, in the 
Annales, the reigns of Tiberius, Caligula, Claudius, and Nero. Of the four- 
teen (some say thirty) “books” of the Histories four and a half remain, all 
devoted to the years 69 and 70; of the Annals twelve books sundve from an 
original sixteen or eighteen. Even in this mutilated form they are the most 
powerful works in extant Roman prose; we may vaguely imagine the 
grandeur and impress of the whole. Tacitus had hoped to chronicle also 
the reigns of Augustus, Nerva, and Trajan, mitigating the gloom of his 
published works with some commemoration of constructive statesmanship. 
But the years were not given him; and posterity has judged him, as he judged 
the past, from a somber aspect alone. 

“The chief duty of the historian,” he thought, “is to judge the actions 
of men, so that the good may meet with the reward due to virtue, and perni- 
cious citizens may be deterred by the condemnation that awaits evil deeds 
at the tribunal of posterity.” ® It is a strange conception, which turns history 
into a Last Judgment and the historian into God. So conceived, history is 
a sermon— ethics teaching by horrible examples— and falls, as Tacitus as- 
sumed, under the rubric of rhetoric. It is easy for indignation to be eloquent 
but hard for it to be fair; no morahst should write history. Tacitus re- 
membered tyranny too intimately to view tyrants calmly; he saw nothing 
in Augustus but the destruction of freedom and supposed that all Roman 
genius had ended with Actium.’^ He seems never to have thought of temper- 
ing his indictments by recording the excellent administration and growing 
prosperity of the provinces under the imperial monsters; no one would 

• It was probably written in 98, before Trajan’s campaign against the Dacians. 



LIFE IN THE SECOND CENTURY 


435 


CHAP. XX) 

suspect, from reading him, that Rome was an empire as well as a city. Per- 
haps the lost “books” viewed the provincial world; those that remain make 
Tacitus a deceptive guide, who never lies but never reveals the truth. He 
often cites, and sometimes critically examines, his sources— histories, speeches, 
letters, Acta Diurm, Acta Senatus, and the traditions of old families; but 
for the most ‘part he has heard only the stories of the persecuted nobility, 
and never imagines that'the executions of senators and the assassinations of 
emperors were incidents in a long contest between vicious, cruel, and com- 
petent monarchs and a decadent, cruel, and incompetent aristocracy. He is 
fascinated by striking personahties and events rather than by forces, causes, 
ideas, and processes; he draws the most brilliant and unjust character por- 
traits in history, but he has no conception of economic influences upon po- 
litical events, no interest in the life and industry of the people, the stream of 
trade, the conditions of science, the status of woman, the vicissitudes of be- 
lief, the achievements of poetry, philosophy, or art. In Tacitus Seneca, 
Lucan, and Petronius die, but they do not write; the emperors kill, but they 
do not build. Perhaps the great historian was limited by his audience; prob- 
ably he read parts of his work— following the custom of the time— to the 
aristocratic friends whom Pliny describes as crowding to his receptions; he 
would have told us that these men and women knew Roman Hfe, indr.stry, 
literature, and art, and did not have to be reminded of them; what they 
wanted to hear, again and again, was the exciting story of the evil emperors, 
the heroic deeds of stoic senators, the long war of their noble class against 
tyrannical power. We cannot condemn Tacitus for not succeeding in what 
he did not attempt; we can only regret the narrowness of his great purpose 
and the limitations of his powerful mind. 

He does not pretend to be a philosopher. He praises Agricola’s mother 
for dissuading her son, who “had acquired a keener zest for philosophy than 
became a Roman and a senator.” ® His imagination and art, like Shakespeare’s, 
were too creatively active to let him ponder quietly the meaning and possi- 
bilities of life. He is as rich in illuminating comment as in unverified scandal: 
but it is difficult to find in him any consistent view of God, or man, or the 
state. He is cautiously ambiguous on matters of faith, and suggests ® that 
it is wiser to accept one’s native rehgion than to try to replace it with knowl- 
edge. He rejects most astrologers, auguries, portents, and miracles, but 
accepts some; he is too much of a gentleman to deny the possibility of what 
so many have affirmed. In general, events seem to prove “the indifference 
of the gods to good and bad alike,” and the existence of some unknown, 
perhaps capricious, force that drives men and states fatally onward to their 
destiny '^'^—urgentibus imperii fatis}^ He hopes that Agricola has departed 



436 CAESAR AND CHRIST (CHAP. XX 

to a happy life, but he obviously doubts it, and contents himself with the 
last delusion of great minds— an immortality of fame.^® 

Nor does any utopian aspiration console him. “Most plans of reforma- 
tion are at first embraced with ardor; but soon the novelty ceases, and the 
scheme ends in nothing.” Matters are temporarily better in his time, he 
reluctantly admits; but not even the genius of Trajan will prevent renewed 
deterioration.^® Rome is rotten literally to the core, in the hearts of men, 
of a populace whose disorder of soul has made an anarchy of freedom,^® a 
rabble “fond of innovation and change, and ever ready to shift to the side 
of the strongest.” He mourns the “malignity of the human mind,” and 
scorns like Juvenal the alien stocks in Rome. After blackening the Empire 
he does not dream of returning to the Republic, but hopes that the adoptive 
emperors will reconcile the Principate with liberty.^® In the end, he thinks, 
character is more important than government; what makes a people great 
is not its laws but its men. 

If, despite our surprise in finding a sermon and a drama where we had 
looked for history, we must nevertheless rank Tacitus among the greatest 
of historians, it is because the power of his art redeems the limitations of 
his view. Above all he sees intensely, sometimes deeply, always vividly. The 
portraits he draws stand out more clearly, stride the stage more livingly, 
than any others in historical hterature. Here, too, however, there are 
blemishes. Tacitus composes speeches for his varied personages, all in his own 
fashion and majestic prose; he describes Galba as a simpleton and makes him 
talk hke a sage.®’ And he does not rise to the difficult art of malting his char- 
acters develop in time. Tiberius is the same at the beginning of his reign as 
at the end; and if he appeared to be human at the outset it was, Tacitus 
thinks, pure dissimulation. 

First and last in Tacitus is the splendor of his style. No other author has 
ever said so much so compactly. This does not mean that he is brief; on 
the contrary, he is desultory and diffuse and takes 400 pages of the Histories 
to chronicle two years of time. Sometimes the condensation is extreme to 
the point of affectation or obscurity; every second word then requires a 
sentence to translate it; verbs and conjunctions are disdained as crutches for 
crippled minds. This is the culmination of Sallust’s concise rapidity, of 
Seneca’s pithy epigrams, of the balanced clauses taught in the schools of 
rhetoric. In a long work such a style, unrelieved with passages of a more 
even tenor, becomes an exhausting excitement to the reader, who neverthe- 
less returns to it with mounting fascination. This martial brusqueness, more 
economical of words than of men, this scorn of the props of syntax, this 
passion of feeling and clearness of visualization, this tang of a novel vocabu- 
lary and murderous pungency of unhackneyed phrase, give to the writing 



LIFE IN THE SECOND CENTURY 


CHAP. XX) 


437 


of Tacitus a swiftness, color, and force which no ancient author has equaled. 
The color is dark, the mood is gloomy, the sarcasm stings, and the tone of 
the whole is that of a Dante without tenderness; but the cumulative effect 
is overwhelming. Along this black river of relentless exposure we are carried, 
despite our reservations and objections, by a narrative at once dignified and 
turbulent, stately and impetuous. Character after character rises upon the 
stage and is struck down; scene after scene rushes on until all Rome seems 
ruined and all the participants are dead. We can hardly believe, when we 
emerge from this chamber of horrors, that this period of despotism, coward- 
ice, and immorality flowed into the zenith of monarchy under Hadrian and 
the Antonines, and the quiet decency of Pliny’s friends. 

Tacitus was wrong in scorning philosophy— that is, perspective; all his 
faults were due to lack of it. If he could have disciplined his pen to the 
service of an open mind, he would have placed his name first on the list 
of those who have labored to give form and permanence to the memory 
and heritage of mankind. 


II. JUVENAL 

Unfortunately, Juvenal corroborates Tacitus. What the one writes in 
mordant prose about princes and senators, the other chants in bitter verse 
about women and men. 

Decimus lunius luvenalis, son of a rich freedman, was born at Aquinum in 
Latium (59). He came to Rome for his education and practiced law there 
“for his own amusement.” His satires betray the shock of rural tastes struck 
by the loose turmoil of city life; yet he appears to have been friends with 
Martial, whose epigrams show no prejudice in favor of morality. Shortly 
before Domitian’s death, says an uncertain tradition, Juvenal composed, 
and circulated among his friends, a satire on the influence of dancers at 
court; the pantomime actor Paris, we are told, took offense and had him 
exiled to Egypt. We cannot say if the story is true, nor when Juvenal re- 
turned; in any case he published nothing till after Domitian’s death. The 
first volume of his sixteen satires appeared in loi, the remainder in four 
volumes at intervals in a long life. Probably they were unforgiving memories 
of Domitian’s time; but the indignation that makes them so vivid and un- 
reliable suggests that a few years of “the good emperors” had not cured the 
evils he denounced. Perhaps, again, he chose the satire as a characteristic 
Roman form, found models and some material in Lucilius, Horace, and 
Persius, and molded his fulminations and his wrath on the rhetorical prin- 
ciples that he had learned in the schools. We shall never know how darkly 



438 CAESAR AND CHRIST ( CHAP. XX 

our picture of imperial Rome has been colored by the pleasures of denuncia- 
tion. 

Juvenal takes ever\Thing for his subject, and has no trouble in finding 
in everything seme aspect that can bear condemning. “We are arrived at 
the zenith of vice,” he thinks, “and posterity will never be able to surpass 
us”; so far, so true. The root of the evil is the unscrupulous pursuit of 
wealth. He scorns the plebs that once ruled armies and unmade kings but 
can now be bought with panem et cir censes, bread and circuses; this is 
one of a hundred phrases to which Juvenal’s vitality gave lasting life. He 
resents the influx of Oriental faces, dress, ways, smells, and gods; protests 
against the clannishness of the Jew, and likes least of all the “greedy little 
Greek” {Graeculus esuriens)—th& degenerate descendant of a people once 
great but never honest. He loathes the informers who, like Pliny’s Regulus, 
get rich by reporting “unpatriotic” remarks; the legacy hunters who flutter 
around childless old men; the proconsul living in lifelong luxury on the 
profits of a term in the provinces; the clever law)^ers who spin out law- 
suits like an excreted web. He is disgusted above all by sexual excesses and 
perversions: by the roue who on marrying finds that his lechery has left him 
impotent; by the dandies whose manners, perfumes, and desires make them 
indistinguishable from women; and by the women who think that emancipa- 
tion means that they should be indistinguishable from men. 

His sixth and bitterest satire is devoted to the gentler sex. Postumus is 
thinking of marriage; don’t do it, Juvenal warns him; and then the poet por- 
trays the women of Rome as selfish, shrewish, superstitious, extravagant, 
quarrelsome, haughty, vain, litigious, adulterous, equaling every marriage 
with a divorce, substituting lapdogs for children;-^ going in for athletics, 
worse yet for literature, quoting Virgil at you, spouting rhetoric and phi- 
losophy “oh, may the gods save us from a learned wife! ” He concludes 
that there is hardly a woman in the city worth marrying. A good wife is a 
rare bird (jara avis), stranger than a white crow. He marvels that Postumus 
should think of marriage when “there are so many halters to be had, so many 
high and dizzy windows are accessible, and the Aemilian Bridge is close at 
hand.” No; stay single. And get out of this nerve-wearying bedlam called 
Rome and live in some quiet Italian town where you will meet honest men 
and be safe from criminals, poets, collapsing tenements, and Greeks.^'^ Put 
ambition behind you; the goal is not worth the striving, so long is labor and so 
brief is fame. Live simply, cultivate your garden, desire only so much as 
hunger and thirst, cold and heat demand;*® learn pity, be kind to children, 
keep a sane mind in a healthy body {inem Sana in corpore sano *®). But only 
a fool will pray for a long life. 



CHAP.XS) LIFE IN THE SECOND CENTURY 439 

We can understand such a mood; it is pleasant to contemplate the im- 
perfections cf our neighbors and the despicable inferiority of the world as 
compared with our dreams. Our enjoyment in this case is sharpened by 
Juvenal’s street-comer vocabulary, his easy-moving colloquial hexameters, 
his grim humor, and his lusty style. But we must not take him literally. He 
was angry; he had not made his way in Rome as rapidly as he had hoped; 
it was sweet revenge to lay about him with the bludgeon of a hatred that 
never feigned to be fair. His moral standard was high and sound, though 
tinged with conservative prejudices and delusions about the virtuous past; 
by those standards, used without mercy or modesty, we could indict any 
generation anywhere. Seneca knew how old a pastime this is. “Our fore- 
fathers,” he wrote, “complained, we complain, and our descendants will 
complain, that morals are corrupt, that wickedness holds sway, that men are 
sinking deeper and deeper into sinfulness, that the condition of mankind is 
going from bad to worse.” Around the immoral hub of any society is a 
spreading wheel of wholesome life, in which the threads of tradition, the 
moral imperatives of religion, the economic compulsions of the family, the 
instinctive love and care of children, the watchfulness of women and police- 
men, suffice to keep us publicly decent and moderately sane. Juvenal is the 
greatest of Roman satirists, as Tacitus is the greatest of Roman historians; 
but we should err as much in taking their picture as accurate as we should 
were we to accept without scrutiny the pleasant and civilized scene that rises 
before us as we read the letters of Pliny. 


III. A ROMAN GENTLEMAN 

Wlien he was born at Como in 6i he was named Publius Caecilius 
Secundus. His father owned a farm and villa near the lake and held high 
office in the town. Orphaned early, Publius was adopted and educated first 
by Virginius Rufus, governor of Upper Germany, and then by his uncle 
Caius Pfinius Secundus, author of the Natural History. This busy scholar 
made the boy his son and heir and died soon afterward. According to 
custom, the youth took his adoptive father’s name, causing confusion for 
2000 years. At Rome he studied under Quintilian, who formed his taste on 
Cicero and must receive some of the credit for the Ciceronian fluency of 
Pliny’s style. At i8 he was admitted to the bar; at 39 he was chosen to 
deliver an address of welcome to Trajan. In the same year he was made 
consul; in 103, augur; in 105, “Curator of the Bed and Banks of the Tiber 
and the City Sewers.” He took no fees or gifts for his legal services, but he 
was a rich man and could afford to be magnanimous. He had properties in 



440 CAESAR AND CHRIST (CHAP. XX 

Etruria, at Beneventum, Como, and Laurentum, and offered 3,000,000 
sesterces for another.^^ 

Like many aristocrats of his time, he amused himself by writing: at first a 
Greek tragedy, then some poems, lighthearted and occasionally obscene. 
Reproved by some, he confessed his fault impenitently, and proposed again 
“to indulge in mirth, wit, and gaiety, and enter into the spirit of the most 
wanton muse.” Hearing his letters praised, he composed some for publica- 
tion and issued them at intervals from 97 to 109. Intended not only for the 
public but for the pleasure of the circles he described, they avoided the 
darker aspects of Roman life and passed by as too serious for his purpose 
the larger problems of philosophy and statesmanship. Their worth is in their 
graceful intimacy, and in the rosy light they shed upon Roman character 
and patrician ways. 

Pliny reveals himself with half the candor and all the felicity of 
Montaigne. He has an author’s inevitable vanity, but so openly that it 
hardly offends. “Nothing, I confess, so strongly affects me as the desire of 
a lasting name.” He speaks appreciatively of others as well as of himself, 
adding that “one may be sure a man has many virtues if he admires those 
of others”; in any case it is a relief, coming from Juvenal and Tacitus, to 
hear an author speak well of his fellow men. He was as generous in act as 
in words, ever ready with favors, loans, or gifts, from finding a husband 
for a friend’s niece to enriching his native town. Finding that Quintilian 
could not give his daughter a dowry befitting the high station of the man 
she was marrying, he sent her 50,000 sesterces, excusing the smallness of the 
gift.®® He gave an old schoolmate 300,000 to make him eligible for the 
equestrian class; when the daughter of a friend inherited a legacy of debts 
he paid them off; and at some risk he lent a considerable sum to a philosopher 
banished by Domitian. To Como he gave a temple, a secondary school, an 
institute for poor children, a municipal bath, and ii, 000,000 sesterces for 
a public library. 

What is especially pleasing in him is his love for his home, or his homes. 
He does not denounce Rome, but he is happier in Como or Laurentum, near 
the lake or the sea. There his chief enterprises are reading and doing nothing. 
He loves his gardens, and the mountain scenery behind them; he did not 
have to wait for Rousseau to make him enjoy nature. He speaks with the 
greatest tenderness of his third uife, Calpurnia, her sweet temper and pure 
mind, her fond delight in his success and his books. She read them aU (he 
believed) and learned many of his pages by heart; she set his poems to music 
and sang them, and had a private corps of couriers to keep her informed of 
every development when he was mdng an important case. She was but one 
of many good women in his circle. He tells of the modesty, patience, and 



CHAP.XX) LIFE IN THE SECOND CENTURY 441 

courage of a fourteen-year-oId girl who, just betrothed, learned that she 
had an incurable illness, and cheerfully awaited death;-®® of Pompeius 
Satuminus’ wife, whose letters to her husband were lyrics of affection and 
fine Latin; of Thrasea’s daughter Fannia, who uncomplainingly bore 
exile for defending her husband Helvidius, nursed a relative through a 
dangerous illness, caught it, and died of it; “How complete,” he exclaims, “is 
her virtue, her sanctity, her sobriety, her courage!” 

He had a hundred friends, some great, many good. He joined with 
Tacitus in prosecuting Marius Priscus for dishonesty and cruelty as pro- 
consul in Africa; the two orators corrected each other’s speeches and in- 
vested in mutual compliments; Tacitus lifted Pliny to heaven by reporting 
that the literary world was pairing them as the leading writers of the age.®® 
He knew Martial, but from an aristocratic distance. He took Suetonius with 
him to Bithynia and helped him to get the “right of three children” without 
having any. His circle buzzed with literary and musical amatenrs, with 
public recitals of poetry and speeches. “I do not believe,” says the learned 
Boissier, “that in any other period has literature been so greatly loved.” 
Homer and Virgil were being studied on the banks of the Danube and the 
Rhine, and the Thames was trembling with rhetoric.^^ It was, in its upper 
half, an elegant and amiable society, rich in loving marriages, parental 
affection, humane masters, sincere friendships, and fine courtesies. “I accept 
your invitation to supper,” reads one letter, “but I must make this agreement 
beforehand, that you dismiss me soon, and treat me frugally. Let our table 
abound only in philosophical conversation, and let us enjoy even that within 
limits.” 

Most of the men whom Pliny describes were members of the new 
aristocracy stemming from the provinces; they were not idlers, for nearly 
every one of them held public office and shared in the admirable adminis- 
tration of the Empire under Trajan. Pliny himself was sent as propraetor to 
Bithynia to restore the solvency of some cities there. His letters include 
some inquiries addressed to the Prince, and Trajan’s pithy replies; they 
show Pliny accomplishing his mission with ability and honor, though with 
a strangely detailed dependence upon the Emperor’s advice. His final letter 
begs forgiveness for sending his sick wife home by the coaches of the im- 
perial post. Thereafter Pliny disappears from literature and history, leaving 
behind him a redeeming picture of a Roman gentleman, and of Italy in her 
happiest age. 

rv. THE CULTURAL DECLINE 

We should obscure these outstanding figures if we were to surround them 
with lesser lights. After them there were no giants in pagan Latin letters. Reason 



442 CAESAR AND CHRIST (cHAP. XX 

had made its great effort from Ennius to Tacitus and had spent itself. It is a 
shock to pass from the grandeur of the Histories and the Annals to the scandalous 
chronicle of Suetonius’ Lives of Illustrious Men ( i lo) ; history is here degenerat- 
ing into biography, and biography into anecdote; portents and miracles and 
superstitions crowd the pages, and only the Elizabethan English of Philemon 
Holland’s translation (1606) has raised the book to the level of literature. Less 
disturbing is the descent from Pliny to the letters of Fronto. Perhaps these were 
not meant for publication, and cannot be fairly compared with Pliny’s; some 
were spoiled by a search for archaic phraseology, but many are touched by real 
affection of the teacher for his pupil. Aulus Gellius supported the archaizing 
movement in h's Attic Nights (169)— the largest collection of worthless trifles 
in ancient literature; and Apuleius brought it to a climax in The Golden Ass. 
Apuleius and Fronto came from Africa, and the fad may have had partial source 
in the fact that written Latin there had departed less than in Rome from the 
language of the people and the Republic. Fronto rightly believed in strengthen- 
ing literat are with popular speech, as one freshens a plant by turning over the 
earth at its roots. But youth does not come twice to a man, a nation, a literature, 
or a 1 mguage. Orientalization had set in and could not be stopped. The common 
Greek tongue of the Hellenistic East and Oriental Rome was becoming the 
language of literature as well as of life; Fronto’s pupil chose it for his Meditations. 
Appian, an Alexandrian Greek living at Rome, chose Greek for his vivid Histories 
of Rome’s wars {ca. 160); so did Claudius Aelian, a Roman by birth and blood; 
a half century later Dio Cassius, a Roman senator, would write his history of 
Rome in Greek. Leadership in literature was passing back from Rome to the 
Greek East; not to the Greek spirit, but to the Oriental soul using Hellenic 
speech. There would be giants again in Latin; but they would be Christian saints. 

Roman art declined more slowly than Roman letters. Technical abilitsr lin- 
gered on and produced good architecture, sculpture, painting, and mosaic. The 
head of Nerva, in the Vatican, carries on the vivid realism of Flavian portraits, 
and the Column of Trajan is an impressive relief despite much crudity. Hadrian 
labored to revive Hellenic classicism, but found no one to play Pheidias to his 
Pericles; the inspiration that had stirred Greece after Marathon, and Rome after 
Actium, was missing in an age of self-limitation, contentment, and peace. The 
busts of Hadrian lose character by their smooth Hellenistic lines; the heads of 
Plotina and Sabina are pretty; but the portraits of Antinoiis repel us by their sleek 
effeminate insipidity. Probably Hadrian’s classical reaction was a mistake: it 
ended the forceful naturalism and individuation of Flavian and Trajanic sculp- 
ture, which had had indigenous roots in Italian tradition and character. Nothing 
reaches maturity except through the fulfillment of its own nature. 

Under the Antonines Roman sculpture had its penultimate fling. Once at least it 
achieved perfection, in the figure of a young woman whose veiled head and 
modest robes are molded with a bewitching delicacy and firmness of line.^® Al- 
most as good is the portrait of Marcus’ Faustina, aristocratically refined, and 
sensuous enough to accord with the innuendoes of history. Aurelius himself was 



CHAP.XX) LIFE IN THE SECOND CENTURY 443 

carved or cast in a thousand forms, from the meditative and guileless yet eagerly 
sensitive youth of the Capitoline bust to the curly-headed professor in armor of 
that same collection. Every tourist knows the stately bronze of Aurelius bn- 
perator on horseback, which, since Michelangelo restored it, has dominated the 
piazza of Rome’s Capitol. 

Relief remained to the end a favorite Roman art. The Etruscan and Hellenistic 
custom of carving mythological or historical scenes upon sarcophagi returned in 
Hadrian’s time' as the hope of immortality took more personal and even physical 
form, and burial replaced cremation. Eleven panels surviving from triumphal 
arches erected to commemorate the campaigns of Aurelius * show the naturalistic 
style in perfection: no one is idealized, every participant is individualized; Marcus, 
receiving without pride the submission of a fallen enemy, is an appealingly human 
figure; and the defeated are shown not as barbarians but as men worthy of their 
long struggle for freedom. In 174 the Senate and people of Rome raised that 
Column of Aurelius which still adorns the Piazza Colonna; inspired by Trajan’s 
Column, it pictured the Marcomannic Wars with a sympathetic art that honored 
conquerors and conquered alike. 

The spirit of the Emperor had helped to form the art and morals of his time. 
The games were less cruel, the laws more considerate of the weak; marriage was 
apparently more lasting and content. Immorality continued, openly in a minority, 
clandestinely in the majority, as at all times; but it had passed its peak with Nero 
and had ceased to be fashionable. Men as well as women were returning to the 
old religion or devoting themselves to new ones; and the philosophers approved. 
Rome was now teeming with them, invited, welcomed, or tolerated by Aurelius; 
they took full advantage of his generosity and his power, crowded his court, re- 
ceived appointments and emoluments, delivered countless lectures, and opened 
many schools. In their imperial pupil they gave the world the culmination and 
disintegration of ancient philosophy. 


V. THE EMPEROR AS PHILOSOPHER 

Six years before his death Marcus Aurelius sat down in his tent to formu- 
late his thoughts on human life and destiny. We cannot be sure that the 
Ta eis hea,uton~\o himself”— was intended for the pubhc eye; probably so, 
for even saints are vain, and the greatest man of action has moments of 
weakness in which he aspires to write a book. Marcus was not an expert 
author; most of the training that Fronto had given him in Latin was wasted 
now, since he wrote in Greek; besides, these “Golden Thoughts” were 
penned in the intervals of travel, battles, revolts, and many tribulations; we 
must forgive them for being disconnected and formless, often repetitious, 

• Eight adorn the Arch of Constantine; three are in the Museo de’ Conservatori. 



CAESAR AND CHRIST 


444 


(chap. XX 


sometimes dull. The book is precious only for its contents— its tenderness and 
candor, its half-conscious revelations of a pagan-Christian, ancient-medieval 
soul. 

Like most thinkers of his time, Aurelius conceived philosophy not as a 
speculative description of infinity, but as a school of virtue and a way of 
life. He hardly bothers to make up his mind about God; sometimes he talks 
like an agnostic, acknowledging that he does not know; but having made 
that admission, he accepts the traditional faith with a simple piety. “Of what 
worth is it to me,” he asks, “to live in a universe without gods or Provi- 
dence? ” He speaks of deity now in the singular, now in the plural, with 
all the indifference of Genesis. He offers pubhc prayer and sacrifice to the 
old divinities, but in his private thought he is a pantheist, deeply impressed 
with the order of the cosmos and the wisdom of God. He has a Hindu’s 
sense of the interdependence of the world and man. He marvels at the growth 
of the child out of a little seed, the miraculous formation of organs, strength, 
mind, and aspiration out of a httle food.^® He believes that if we could under- 
stand we should find in the universe the same order and creative power as 
in man. “All things are implicated with one another, and the bond is holy. 
. . . There is a common reason in all intelligent beings; one god pervades 
all things, one substance, one law, one truth. . . . Can a clear order sub- 
sist in thee, and disorder in the All?” 

He admits the difficulty of reconciling evil, suffering, apparently un- 
merited misfortune, with a good Providence; but we cannot judge the" place 
of any element or event in the scheme of things unless v/e see the whole; 
and who shall pretend to such total perspective? It is therefore insolent and 
ridiculous for us to judge the world; wisdom hes in recognizing our limita- 
tions, in seeking to be harmonious parts of the universal order, in trying 
to sense the Mind behind the body of the world, and co-operatino- with it 
willingly. To one who has reached this view “everything that happens hap- 
pens justly”— i.e., as in the course of nature; nothing that is according to 
nature can be evil; everything natural is beautiful to him who under- 
stands.^® All things are determined by the universal reason, the inherent logic 
of the whole; and every part must welcome cheerfully its modest role and 
fate. “Equanimity” (the watchword of the dying Antoninus) “is the volun- 
tary acceptance of the things that are assigned to thee by the nature of the 
whole.” 


Everything harmonizes with me that harmonizes with thee, O 
universe. Nothing for me is too early or too late which is in due time 
for thee. Everything is fruit to me that thy seasons bring, O Nature. 
From thee are all things, in thee are all things, to thee aU things 
return.®^ ° 



CHAP.XX) LIFE IN THE SECOND CENTURY 445 

Knowledge is of value only as a tool of the good life. “What, then, can 
direct a man? One thing only— philosophy” not as logic or learning, but 
as a persistent training in moral excellence. “Be thou erect, or be made 
erect.” God has given every man a guiding daimon, or inner spirit— his 
reason. Virtue is the life of reason. 

These are the principles of the rational soul. It traverses the whole 
universe, and surveys its form, and extends itself into the infinity of 
time, and embraces the cyclical renewal of all things, and compre- 
hends that those who come after us will see nothing new, nor have 
those before us seen anything more; but in a manner he who is forty 
years old, if he has any understanding at all, has seen, by virtue of this 
uniformity, all things that have been or will be.®^ 

Marcus thinks his premises compel him to puritanism. “Pleasure is neither 
good nor useful.” He renounces the flesh and all its works, and talks at 
times hke some Anthony in the Thebaid: 

Observe how ephemeral and worthless human things are, and what 
was yesterday a little mucus, tomorrow will be a mummy or ashes. 

. . . The whole space of man’s life is but little, and yet with what 
troubles it is filled . . . and with what a wretched body it must be 
passed! . . . Turn it inside out, and see what kind of thing it is.®® 

The mind must be a citadel free from bodily desires, passions, anger, or 
hate. It must be so absorbed in its work as hardly to notice the adversities 
of fortune or the barbs of enmity. “Every man is worth just so much as the 
things about which he busies himself.” ®^ He reluctantly concedes that there 
are bad men in this world. The way to deal with them is to remember that 
they, too, are men, the helpless victims of their own faults by the 
determinism of circumstance.®® “If any man has done thee wrong, the harm 
is his own; it is thy duty to forgive him.” ®® If the existence of evil men 
saddens you, think of the many fine persons you have met, and the many 
virtues that are mingled in imperfect characters.®® Good or bad, all men 
are brothers, kinsmen in one God; even the ugliest barbarian is a citizen of 
the fatherland to which we all belong. “As Aurelius I have Rome for my 
country; as a man, the world.” ®^ Does this seem an impracticable philos- 
ophy? On the contrary, nothing is so invincible as a good disposition, if it 
be sincere.®" A really good man is immune to misfortune, for whatever evil 
befalls him leaves him still his own soul. 

Will this [evil] that has happened prevent thee from being just, 
magnanimous, temperate, prudent . . . modest, free? . . . Suppose 
that men curse thee, kill thee, cut thee in pieces: what can these things 
do to prevent thy mind from remaining pure, wise, sober, and just? 



446 


CAESAR AND CHRIST 


(chap. XX 

If a man stand by a limpid, pure spring and curse it, the spring never 
ceases to send up clean water; if he cast dirt into it, or filth, it will 
speedily wash them out and be unpolluted again. . . . On every oc- 
casion that brings thee trouble, remember to apply this principle: 
that this is not a misfortune, but that to bear it nobly is good for- 
tune. . . . Thou scest how few the things are to which if a man lays 
hold of, he is able to live a life that flows on quietly and is like the 
existence of the gods.®® 

Marcus’ life, however, did not flow on quietly; he had to kill Germans 
while writing this Fifth Gospel, and in the end he faced death with no 
consolation in the son who would succeed him, and no hope of happiness 
beyond the grave. Soul and body ahke return to their original elements. 

For as the mutation and dissolution of bodies make room for other 
bodies doomed to die, so the souls that are removed into the air, after 
life’s existence, are transmuted and diffused . . . into the seminal 
intelligence of the universe, and make room for new souls.®* . . , 

Thou hast existed as a part; thou shalt disappear in that which pro- 
duced thee. . . . This, too, nature wills. . . . Pass, then, throuffh 
this little space of time conformably to nature, and end thy journeys 
in content, just as an olive falls when it is ripe, blessing the nature that 
produced it, and thanking the tree cn which it grew.®® 


VI. COMMODUS 

Wflien the officer of the gutrd asked the dying Marcus for the watchword 
of the day he answered: “Go to the rising sun; my sun is setting.” The rising 
sun was then nineteen, a robust and dashing youth without inhibitions, 
morals, or fear. One would have expected of him, rather than of Marcus 
the ailing saint, a policy of war to victory or death; instead, he offered the 
enemy immediate peace. They were to withdraw from the vicinity of the 
Danube, to surrender most of their arms, return all Roman prisoners and 
deserters, pay Rome an annual tribute of corn, and persuade 13,000 of 
their soldiers to enlist in the Roman legions.®® All Rome condemned him 
except the people; his generals fumed at allowing the trapped prey to 
escape and fight again another day. During the reign of Commodus, how- 
ever, no trouble came from the Danubian tribes. 

The young prince, though no coward, had seen enough of war; he needed 
peace to enjoy Rome. Back in the capital, he snubbed the Senate and 
loaded the plebs with unprecedented gifts-725 denarii to each citizen. 
Finding no field in politics for his exuberant strength, he hunted beasts on 



LIFE IN THE SECOND CENTURY 


447 


CHAP. XX) 

the imperial estates and developed such skill with sword and bow that he 
decided to perform publicly. For a time he left the palace and lived in the 
gladiators’ school; he drove chariots in the races, and fought in the arena 
ag::inst animals and men.®^ Pre:umably the men who opposed him took care 
to let him win; but he thought nothing of fighting, unaided and before 
breakfast, a hippopotamus, an elephant, and a tiger, which made no dis- 
tinctions for royalty.®® He was so perfect a bowman that with a hundred 
arrows he killed a hundred tigers in one exhibition. He would let a panther 
leap upon seme condemned criminal and then slay the animal with one 
arrew, leaving the man unhurt to die again.*® He had his exploits recorded 
in the Acta Diurna and insisted on being paid, out of the Treasury, for 
each of his thousand combats as a gladiator. 

The historians upon whom we must here depend wrote, like Tacitus, 
from the viewpoint and traditions of the offended aristocracy; we cannot 
tell how much of the marvels they relate are history, how much are re- 
venge. We are assured that Commodus drank and gambled, wasted the 
public funds, kept a harem of 300 women and 300 boys, and hked to vary 
his sex occasionally, at least by using a woman’s garb, even at the public 
games. Tales of unbelievable cruelty are transmitted to us: Commodus 
ordered a votary of Bellona to amputate an arm in proof of piety; forced 
some women devotees of Isis to beat their breasts with pine cones till they 
died; killed men indiscriminately with his club of Hercules; gathered 
cripples together and slew them one by one with arrows. . . One of his 
mistresses, Marcia, was apparently a Christian; for her sake, we are told, 
he pardoned some Christians who had been condemned to the Sardinian 
mines. Her devotion to him suggests that in this man, described as more 
bestial than any beast, there was some lovable element unrecorded by 

Like his predecessors, he was aroused to the wildest ferocity by fear oi 
assassination. His aunt Lucilla formed a conspiracy to kill him; he discovered 
it, had her executed, and on proof or suspicion of participation put so many 
men of rank to death that soon hardly any survived who had been prominent 
in Marcus’ reign. Delators, who had almost disappeared for a century, re- 
turned to activity and favor, and a new terror raged in Rome. Appointing 
Perennis as praetorian prefect, Commodus yielded the reins of government 
to him, and (the tradition says) abandoned himself to sexual dissipation. 
Perennis ruled efficiently but mercilessly; he organized his own terror and 
had all his opponents slain. The Emperor, suspecting that Perennis planned 
to replace him, surrendered this second Sejanus to the Senate, which re- 
enacted its role of glowing revenge. Cleander, a former slave, succeeded 
Perennis (185) and surpassed him in corruption and cruelty; any office 




448 CAESAR AND CHRIST (cHAP. XX 

might be had for a proper bribe, any decision of any court could be re- 
versed. Under his orders senators and knights were put to death for treason 
or criticism. In 1 90 a mob besieged the villa where Commodus was staying 
and demanded Cleander’s death. The Emperor accommodated them. 
Cleander’s successor, Laetus, after holding power for three years, judged 
that his time had come. One day he chanced upon a proscription list that 
contained the names of his supporters and friends, and of Marcia. On the last 
day of 192 Marcia gave Commodus a cup of poison; and when it worked too 
slowly the athlete whom he had kept to wrestle with strangled him in his 
bath. He was a youth of thirty-one. 

When Marcus died Rome had reached the apex of her curve and was 
already touched with decay. Her boundaries had been extended beyond the 
Danube, into Scotland and the Sahara, into the Caucasus and Russia, and 
to the gates of Parthia. She had accomplished for that confusion of peoples 
and faiths a unity not of language and culture, but at least of economy and 
law. She had woven it into a majestic commonwealth, within which the 
exchange of goods moved in unprecedented plenty and freedom; and for 
two centuries she had guarded the great realm from barbarian inroads and 
had given it security and peace. All the white man’s world looked to her 
as the center of the universe, the omnipotent and eternal city. Never had 
there been such wealth, such splendor, or such power. 

Nevertheless, amid the prosperity that made Rome brilliant in this second 
century, all the seeds were germinating of the crisis that would ruin Italy 
in the third. Marcus had contributed heavily to the debacle by na ming 
Commodus his heir and by wars that centralized ever more authority in the 
hands of the Emperor. Commodus kept in peace the prerogatives assumed 
by Aurelius in war. Private and local independence, initiative, and pride 
withered as the power and functions of the state increased; and the wealth 
of nations was drained away by ever-rising taxation to support a self- 
multiplying bureaucracy and the endless offensives of defense. The mineral 
wealth of Italy was diminishing,^^ pestilence and famine had taken bitter 
toll, the system of tillage by slaves was failing, governmental expenditures 
and doles had exhausted the Treasury and debased the currency. Italian 
industry was losing its markets in the provinces through provincial compe- 
tition, and no economic statesmanship appeared to make up for a languish- 
ing foreign trade by a wider distribution of buying power at home. Mean- 
while the provinces had recovered from the e.xactions of Sulla, Pompey, 
Caesar, Cassius, Brutus, and Antony; their ancient skills had revived, their 
industries were flourishing, their new wealth was financing science, philos- 
ophy, and art. Their sons replenished the legions, their generals led them; 
soon their armies would hold Italy at their mercy and make their generals 





V 


" ^ ii'" ^ it .X 



**''*^' ' . 


Fig. -^0— Altar Found at Ostia 
Museo delle Terme, Rome 








CHAP.XX) LIFE IN THE SECOND CENTURY 449 

emperors. The process of conquest was finished and was to be reversed; 
henceforth the conquered would absorb the conquerors. 

As if conscious of these omens and problems, the mind of Rome, at the 
close of the Antonine age, sank into a cultural and spiritual fatigue. The 
practical disfranchisement of first the assemblies and then the Senate had 
removed the mental stimulus that comes from free political activity and a 
widespread sense of liberty and power. Since the prince had almost all 
authority, the citizens left him almost all responsibility. More and more 
of them, e.ven in the aristocracy, retired into their families and their private 
affairs; citizens became atoms, and society began to fall to pieces internally 
precisely when unity seemed most complete. Disillusionment with democ- 
racy was followed by disillusionment with monarchy. The “Golden 
Thoughts” of Aurelius were often leaden thoughts, weighted down with 
the suspicion that Rome’s problems could not be solved, that the multiply- 
ing barbarians could not long be held back by a sterile and pacific breed. 
Stoicism, which had begun by preaching strength, was ending by preaching 
resignation. Almost all the philosophers had made their peace with religion. 
For 400 years Stoicism had been to the upper classes a substitute for re- 
ligion; now the substitute was put aside, and the ruling orders turned back 
from the books of the philosophers to the altars of the gods. And yet pagan- 
ism, too, was dying. Like Italy, it was flushed only with governmental aid 
and was nearing exhaustion. It had conquered philosophy; but already its 
temple precincts heard reverently the names of invading deities. The age 
was heavy with the resurrection of the provinces and the incredible victory 
of Christ. 




BOOK IV 

THE EMPIRE 

146 B.C.-A.D. 192 



CHRONOLOGICAL TABLE 


B.C. 

1200: Goidelic Celts invade England 
900: Brythonic and Belgic Celts invade 
England 

350: Pytheas of Marseilles explores the 
North Sea 

248: Arsacid Dynasty begins in Parthia 
241-10: Sicily becomes a province 
238: Sardinia and Corsica acquired 
211-190: Arsaces II of Parthia 
197: Spain acquired 
170-38: Mithridates I of Parthia 
168: Macedonia acquired 
167: lUyricum 

146: Achaea, “Africa,” Epirus 
145-130: Ptolemy VII 
i35“-io5: John Hyrcanus, King of Judea 
135-51: Poseidonius 

133: Attalus III bequeaths Pergamum 
124-88: Mithridates II of Parthia 
121: GaUia Narbonensis 
112-05: The Jugurthine War 

1 10: Philo of Byzantium, physicist 
104-78: Alexander Jannaeus, King of Judea 
102: Cilicia; Pamphylia 
88-4: First Mithridatic War 
88: Massacre of Romans in Near East 
83-1: Second Mithridatic War 
78-69: Alexandra, Queen of Judea 

76: Timomachus of Byzantium, painter 
75-63: Third Mithridatic War 
74: Bithynia 
74-67: Cyrene and Crete 
69-63: Aristobulus II, King of Judea 
64: Syria 

63: Pontus and Judea become Roman 
provinces 

63-40: Hyrcanus II, King of Judea 
58: Cyprus 

58-50: Caesar conquers Gaul 
55,54: Caesar in Britain 

50: Hero of Alexandria; Meleager of 
Gadara 
46: Numidia 

40: Parthians invade Syria 
37-4: Herod the Great 
30: Egypt 
25: Galatia 


25-4: Aelius Gallus’ expedition into Ara- 
bia Fehx 

17: Upper and Lower Germany ac- 
quired 

15: Noricum; Raetia 
14: Maritime Alps 
II: Moesia 

7: FI. Strabo, geographer 
4(?): Birth of Christ 

B.C. 4-6 A.D.: Archelaus, King of Judea; Herod 
Antipas, Tetrarch of Galilee 
AJ). 17: Cappadocia 
40: Mauretania 
43: Britain 

47 : Revolt of Caractacus 
50: Dioscorides, pharmacologist 
51-63: War between Parthia and Rome 
55-60: Corbulo subjugates Armenia 
61. Revolt of Boudicca 
64: Cottian Alps 

70-80: Roman conquest of Wales 
77-84: Agiicola, governor of Britain 
72: Extinction of Seleucid Dynasty 
89; Plutarch in Rome 
90: Epictetus 
95: Dio Chrysostom 
100: ApoUodorus of Damascus, architect 
105: Arabia Petrea 
107: Dacia 

1 14: Armenia, Assyria, Mesopotamia 
1 1 5 : Soranus of Ephesus, physician 
117: Hadrian relinquishes Armenia and 
Assyria 

120: Marinus of Tyre, geographer 
122: Hadrian’s M^all in England 
130: Aelia Capitolina founded on site of 
Jerusalem; Theon of Smyrna, 
mathematician; Arrian of Nico- 
media, historian; Claudius Ptolemy, 
astronomer 

142: Wall of Antoninus Pius in England 
147-91: Vologeses III of Parthia 
150: Lucian; Aelius Aristides 
160: Galen, physician; Pausanias, geog- 
rapher 

190: Sextus Empiricus, philosopher 
227: End of the Arsacid Dynasty 



CHAPTER XXI 


Italy 


I. A ROSTER OF CITIES 

L et us stop at this precarious zenith and try to realize that the Empire 
j was greater than Rome.We have lingered unduly at this brilliant center, 
which hypnotizes historians as it fascinated provincials. In truth the vitality 
of the great realm no longer dwelt in the corrupt and dying capital; its 
surviving health and strength, much of its beauty, most of its mental hfe 
lay in the provinces and in Italy. We can have no just idea of what Rome 
meant, nor of its astonishing achievement in organization and pacification, 
until we leave it and surrender ourselves to a tour of the thousand cities 
that made up the Roman world.* 

“How shall I commence this undertaking?” the elder Pliny asked as he began 
his description of Italy, “so vast is the number of places— what man could enumer- 
ate them all?— and so great is their individual renown!” ^ Around and south of 
Rome lay Latium, once her mother, then her enemy, then her granary, then a 
paradise of suburbs and villas for Romans who had both money and taste. South 
and west from the capital fine roads and the Tiber led to the rival harbors of 
Portus and Ostia on the Tyrrhenian Sea. Ostia had its great age in the second 
and third centuries of our era. Merchants and longshoremen crowded its streets 
and filled its theaters; its homes and apartment houses were remarkably like those 
of Rome today; as late as the fifteenth century a Florentine traveler marveled at 
the wealth of the town and its sumptuous adornment. Some surviving columns, 
and an altar elegantly designed and carved with delicate floral reliefs, show that 
even this commercial population had absorbed the classic conception of the 
beautiful. 

Southward on the coast rose Antium (Anzio), where the richest Romans, 
many emperors, and favored gods had palaces or temples reaching out into the 
Mediterranean to catch any passing breeze; in its three miles of ruins were found 
such master sculptures as the Borghese Gladiator and the Apollo Belvedere. Near 
by an extant monument reminds “excellent citizens,” now nineteen centuries 
dead, that they have recently had the pleasure of seeing eleven gladiators die in 
combat with ten ferocious bears.^ To the north, beyond the coastal hills, Aquinum 
gave birth to Juvenal, and Arpinum plumed itself on Marius and Cicero. Twenty 

* The reader may follow this pilgrimage on the end maps of this book. 

453 




CAESAR AND CHRIST 


454 


(chap. XXI 


miles from Rome was the old town of Praeneste (Palestrina), its pretty homes 
built upon terraces in the mountain slopes, its gardens famous for their roses, its 
peak crowned with a celebrated temple to the goddess Fortuna Primigenia, who 
gave good luck to women in childbirth, and exchanged oracles for cash. Tus- 
culum, ten miles from Rome, was similarly rich in gardens and villas; here old 
Cato was born, and Cicero placed his Tusculan Disputations* Most renowned of 
Rome’s suburbs was Tibur (Tivoli), where Hadrian spread his country house 
and Zenobia, Queen of Palmyra, spent her captive years. 

North of Rome, Etruria experienced under the Principate a modest resurrec- 
tion. Perusia was largely destroyed and partly restored by Augustus, whose artists 
beautified there an old Etruscan arch. Arretium gave Maecenas to Rome and 
pottery to the world. Pisae was already hoar with age: it traced its name and 
origin to a colony of Greeks from Pisa in the Peloponnesus, and made a living by 
organizing the lumber business along the Amus River. Farther up the same stream 
was a young Roman colony, Florentia, rare among cities because it probably 
underestimated its future. At the northwestern extremity of Etruria were the 
quarries of Carrara; Rome’s finest marble was conveyed thence to the port of 
Luna, and went by ship to the capital. Genua had long served as an outlet for the 
goods of northwestern Italy; as far back as 209 b.c. we hear of the Carthaginians 
destroying it in a ruthless commercial war; it has been destroyed many times 
since, and has always achieved a fairer reincarnation. 

Under the Alps lay Augusta Taurinorum, founded by the Taurini Gauls and 
made a Roman colony by Augustus; its ancient pavements and drains can still 
be seen under the streets of Turin; and a massive gate survives from Augustan 
days to remind us that the city was once a fortress against invaders from the north. 
Here the lazy Padus (Po), rising in the Cottian Alps, turns eastward 250 miles to 
divide north Italy into what the early Republic knew as Transpadane and Cis- 
padane Gaul. In all the peninsula the valley of the Po was the region most fertile, 
populous, and prosperous. At the foot of the Alps were those lakes-Verbanus 
(Maggiore), Larius (Como), and Benacus (Garda)— whose splendor feasted the 
eye and soul of those generations as well as ours. From the younger Pliny’s 
Comum a main trade route led south to Mediolanum (Milan). Settled by the 
Gauls in the fifth century b.c., it was already a metropolis and educational center 
in the days of Virgil; by a.d. 286 it would replace Rome as the capital of the 
Western Empire. Verona controlled the trade over the Brenner Pass and was 
rich enough to have an amphitheater (recently restored) seating 25,000 specta- 
tors. Along the winding Po rose Placentia (Piacenza), Cremona, Mantua, and 
Ferrara— originally frontier towns designed to hold the Gauls at bay. 

North of the Po and east of the Adige lay Venetia. The district took its name 
from the Veneti, early immigrants from Illyria. Herodotus tells how the leaders 
of these tribes annually brought together the marriageable lasses in their villages, 
put a price upon each according to her beauty, wed her to the man who paid 

• Tusculum’s heir, Frascati, is still the resort of the Italian rich; there are the vUlas Aldo- 
brandini, Torlonia, Mondragone, etc.s 



ITALY 


455 


CHAP. XXl) 

the price, and used the money to provide alluring dowries for the less alluring 
girls.^ Venice itself was not yet born, but at Pola on the Istrian peninsula, at 
Tergeste (Trieste), Aquileia, and Patavium (Padua), substantial cities crowned 
the head of the Adriatic. Pola still has from Roman days a stately arch, a pretty 
temple, and an amphitheater only less impressive than its model, the Colosseum. 
South of the Po a lin e of important cities ran from Placentia through Parma, 
Mutina (Modena), Bononia (Bologna), and Faventia (Faenze) to Ariminum. 
Here, at Rimini, is one of the most perfectly preserved of the countless bridges 
built by Roman engineers; it carried the Flaminian Way into the city through 
an arch as strong and dominating as the Roman character. A branch road led 
from Bononia to Ravenna, the Venice of Roman days, built upon piles in marshes 
made by several rivers emptying into the Adriatic; Strabo describes it as “pro- 
vided with thoroughfares by means of bridges and ferries.” ® Augustus stationed 
there his Adriatic fleet, and several emperors in the fifth century made the city 
their ofiicial residence. The superior fertility of northern Italy, its healthier and 
more stimulating climate, its mineral resources, varied industries, and cheaply- 
borne river trade, raised the region to economic supremacy over central Italy 
in the first century of our era and to political leadership in the third. 

South of Ariminum the eastern coast, rocky, stormy, and harborless, developed 
few cities of moment north of Brundisium. And yet there were in Umbria, 
Picenum, Samnium, and Apulia many small towns whose wealth and art can be 
judged only by studying Pompeii. Asisium gave birth to Propertius as well as 
Saint Francis; Sarsina to Plautus, Amitemum to Sallust, Sulmo to Ovid, Venusia 
to Horace. Beneventum was famous not only for a Pyrrhic defeat but for the 
great arch erected there by Trajan and Hadrian; on its virile reliefs Trajan told 
the story of his achievements in war and peace. On the southeastern coast 
Brundisium commanded traffic with Dalmatia, Greece, and the East. Within the 
“heel” Tarentum, once a proud city-state, was now a declining winter resort for 
Roman magnates and aristocrats. In southern Italy large estates had absorbed 
most of the land and turned it to pasture; the cities lost their peasant patronage, 
and their business classes waned. The Greek communities that had sported their 
sybaritic wealth in earlier times had been ruined by barbarian infiltration and 
the Second Punic War, and were now reduced to small towns in which Latin 
was slowly replacing Greek. On the “toe” Rhegium (Reggio) had a good harbor 
and flourished on the trade with Sicily and Africa. Up the west coast Velia could 
hardly remember the days when Parmenides and Zeno had made it, as Elea, ring 
with metaphysical poetry and impish paradox. Poseidonia, which still amazes 
visitors with its majestic temples, had been renamed Paestum by its Roman col- 
ony, and its Greek stock was melting in a flux of “barbarian”— here Italian— blood 
from the countryside. Only in Campania was Greek civilization alive in Italy. 

Geographically Campania— the mountains and coast around Naples— was 
part of Samnitmi; economically and culturally it was a world by itself, 
industrially more advanced than Rome, financially powerful, and crowding 



45*5 CAESAR AND CHRIST (CHAP. XXI 

into a little space an intense life of political turmoil, literary competition, 
artistic exuberance, epicurean luxury, and exciting public games. The land 
was fertile and produced the finest ohves and grapes in Italy; hence came 
the famous Surrentine and Falemian wines. Probably Varro was thinking 
of Campania when he challenged the world: “You who have wandered over 
many lands, have you ever seen any better cultivated than Italy? ... Is not 
Italy so stocked with fruit trees as to seem one great orchard?” ® At the 
southern end of Campania a precipitous peninsula ran out from Salemum 
to Surrentum. Villas nestled among the vines and orchards on the hills and 
garlanded the shore. Surrentum was as beautiful as Sorrento is now; the 
elder Pliny called it “Namre’s own delight,” upon which she had poured 
out all her gifts.'^ Hardly anything seems to have changed there in two 
thousand years; the people and their customs are probably the same, almost 
the same their gods; and the chffs still stand the sea’s unending siege. 

Facing this promontory lay the buffeted isle of Capreae (Capri). On the 
southern side of the gulf Vesuvius smoked, while Pompeii and Herculaneum 
slept under their lava coat. Then came Neapolis, “Newtown,” the most 
Greek of Itahan cities in Trajan’s day; in Naples’ laziness we watch an echo 
of its ancient addiction to love and sport and art. The people were Itahan; 
the culture, customs, games, were Greek. Here were fine temples, palaces, 
and theaters; here, every fifth year, were held those contests in music and 
poetry at which Statius had won a prize. In the western corner of the gulf 
was the port of PuteoU (Pozzuoli), named from the stench of its sulphur 
pools; ® it throve on Rome’s trade and on manufactures of iron, pottery, 
and glass; an amphitheater here shows us, by its well-preserved underground 
passages, how gladiators and beasts were -introduced into the arena. Across 
the harbor of Puteoh sparkled the villas of Baiae, doubly attractive in their 
setting between mountains and sea; here Caesar, Cahgula, and Nero played 
and rheumatic Romans came to bathe in mineral springs. The place profited 
from its reputation for gambhng and immorality; Varro reports that maidens 
there were common property, and many boys were girls; ® Claudius thought 
Cicero irremediably disgraced for having gone there once.^® “Do you sup- 
pose,” asks Seneca, that Cato would ever have dwelt in a pleasure palace, 
so that he might count the lewd women as they sailed past, the many kinds 
of barges painted in all sorts of colors, the roses wafted about the lake?” 

A few miles north of Baiae, in the crater of a dead volcano. Lake Avemus 
emitted sulphurous fumes of such potency that legend said no bird could 
fly above it and live. Near it was the cave through which Aeneas, in Virgil’s 
epic, had made his ^acilis descensus Avemi into Tartarus. North of the lake 
was the old city of Cumae, now slowly dying through the superior attrac- 
tions of her daughter-city Neapolis, the better harbors of Puteoli and Ostia, 



ITALY 


457 


CHAP. XXI ) 

and the industries of Capua. Capua lay thirty miles inland, in a fertile region 
that sometimes harvested four crops in a year; and its bronze and iron 
works were unrivaled in Italy. Rome had so severely punished it for help- 
ing Hannibal that for two centuries it failed to recover, and Cicero spoke 
of it as the “abode of the politically dead.” Caesar restored it with thou- 
sands of new colonists, and in Trajan’s time it was prospering again. 

Listed so rapidly, these major cities of classic Italy are merely names; we 
mistake them for words on a map and hardly feel that they were the noisy 
abodes of sensitive men eagerly pursuing food and drink, women and gold. 
Let us turn over the ashes of one Roman habitation, and from its strangely 
preserved vestiges try to recapture some movement of the life that ran in 
those ancient streets. 


II. POMPEII 

Pompeii was one of the minor towns of Italy, hardly noticed in Latin 
literature except for its fish sauces, its cabbage, and its burial. Founded by 
Oscans perhaps as early as Rome, peopled by Greek immigrants, captured 
by Sulla and turned into a Roman colony, it was partly destroyed by an 
earthquake in a.d. 63 and was being rebuilt when Vesuvius destroyed it 
again. On August 24, a.d. 79, the volcano exploded and hurled dust and rock 
high into the air amid clouds of smoke and flashes of flame. A heavy rainfall 
turned the erupted matter into a torrent of mud and stone, which in six 
hours covered Pompeii and Herculaneum to a depth of eight or ten feet. 
All that day and the next the earth shook and buildings fell. Audiences were 
buried in the ruins of theaters,^^ hundreds were choked by dust or fumes, 
and tidal waves shut off escape by sea. The elder Pliny was at that time com- 
manding the western fleet at Misenum, near Puteoli. Moved by appeals for 
help and by curiosity to observe the phenomenon at closer range, he boarded 
a small vessel, landed on the southern shore of the gulf, and rescued several 
persons; but as the party ran from the advancing hail and smoke, the old 
scientist was overcome, fell in his tracks, and died.^® The next morning his 
wife and his nephew joined the desperate crowd that fled down the coast, 
while from Naples to Sorrento the continuing eruption blackened the day 
into night. Many refugees, separated in the darkness from their husbands, 
wives, or children, made the terror worse with their laments and shrieks. 
Some prayed to divers gods for help; some cried out that all gods were 
dead and that the long-predicted end of the world had come.^® When, on 
the third day, the sky cleared at last, lava and mud had covered everything 
of Pompeii but the rooftops, and Herculaneum had completely disappeared. 

Of approximately 20,000 population in Pompeii, probably some 2000 lost 



458 CAESAR AND CHRIST ( CHAP. XXI 

their lives. Several of the dead were preserved by a volcanic embalmment: 
the rain and pumice stone that fell upon them made a cement that hardened 
as it dried; and the filling of these impromptu molds has made some grue- 
some plaster casts. A few of the survivors dug mto the ruins to recover 
valuables; thereafter the site was abandoned and was slowly covered by the 
detritus of time. In 1709 an Austrian general sank a shaft at Herculaneum, 
but the tufa layer was so thick (in some places sixty-five feet) that excava- 
tions had to proceed by slow and costly tunneling. The exhuming of 
Pompeii began in 1749 and has gone on at intervals since. Today most of 
the ancient town has been uncovered and has revealed so many houses, ob- 
jects, and inscriptions that in some ways we know ancient Pompeii better 
than ancient Rome. 

The center of its life, as in every Italian city, was the forum. Once, doubt- 
less, it had been the gathering point for farmers and their produce on market 
days; games were held there, and dramas were performed. There the citizens 
had raised shrines to their gods; at one end to Jupiter, at the other to Apollo, 
and near by to Venus Pompeiana, the patron goddess of the town. But they 
were not a religious people; they were too busy with industry and politics, 
games and venery, to have much time for worship; and even in worship 
they honored the phallus as the crown of their Dionysian ritual.” When 
economic and state affairs swelled in volume and dignity, great buildings 
rose around the forum for administration, negotiation, and exchange. 

We may judge from modem Italian towns how the adjoining streets 
throbbed with the hawking of peddlers, the disputes of buyers and sellers, 
the noise of crafts by day and revelry by night. In the ruins of the shops 
excavators found some of the charred and petrified nuts, loaves, and fruits 
that so narrowly escaped a purchaser. Farther down the streets were the 
taverns, gambhng houses, and brothels, each zealous to be all in one. 

We might not have guessed the keenness of Pompeii’s life had not its 
people scratched their sentiments upon public walls. Three thousand such 
graffiti have been copied there, and presumably there were thousands more. 
Sometimes the authors merely inscribed their names or obscene audacities, 
as men still love to do; sometimes they gave hopeful instructions to enemies, 
as Saniius Cornelio, suspe 7 idere—''Szmax's, to Cornelius: go hang yourself.” 
Many of the inscriptions are love messages, often in verse: Romula notes 
that she “tarried here with Stephylus”; and a devoted youth writes, Victoria 
vale, et ubique es, suaviter “Good-by, Victoria, and wherever you 

are may you sneeze pleasantly.” 

Quite as numerous as these messages are the carved or painted announce- 
ments of pubhc events or private offerings. Landlords advertised vacancies, 
losers described missing articles; guilds and other groups declared themselves 



ITALY 


CHAP. XXl) 


459 


for promising candidates in the municipal campaigns. So “the fishermen 
have named Popidius Rufus for aedile”; “the lumbermen and the char- 
coal sellers ask you to elect Marcellinus.” Some graffiti announced gladia- 
torial games, others proclaim.ed the valor of famous gladiators like Celadus, 
suspirium puellarum, “the maidens’ sigh,” or breathed devotion to a favorite 
actor— “Actius, darling of the people, come back soon!” Pompeii lived to 
be amused. It had three public baths, a palaestra, a small theater seating 
2500, a larger one accommodating 5000, and an amphitheater where 20,000 
persons could enjoy by proxy the agony of death. One inscription reads; 
“Thirty pairs of gladiators furnished by the duumvir , . . will fight at 
Pompeii on November 24, 25, and 26. There will be a hunt \venatio\. 
Hurrah for Maius! Bravo, Paris!” Maius was duumvir or city magistrate; 
Paris was the leading gladiator. 

The remains of the domestic interiors suggest a life of solid comfort and 
varied art. Windows were exceptional, central heating was rare; bathrooms 
appear in the richer homes, and a few houses had an outdoor pool in a peri- 
styled garden. Floors were of cement or stone, sometimes of mosaic. One 
frank moneymaker had the words Salve “Hail, gain!” lettered in 

his floor; another inscribed his with Liicnim gandiuvi—'Gwx is joy.” 
Little has been found of the ancient furniture; nearly all was of wood, and 
perished; but a few tables, couches, chairs, and lamps of marble or bronze 
have survived. In the museums at Pompeii and Naples may be seen the 
miscellanea of domestic life: pens, inkstands, scales, kitchen utensils, toilet 
articles, and musical instruments. 

The art recovered from Pompeii or near it suggests that not only the 
aristocrats of the villas, but the merchants of the city enjoyed the cultural 
accessories of life. A private library unearthed at Herculaneum had 1756 
volumes or rolls. \^'’e must not repeat what we have said of the Boscoreale 
cups, or the rich vistas and graceful women painted upon the walls of 
Pompeian homes. Many dwellings had excellent sculptures, and the forum 
contained 1 50 statues. In the Temple of Jupiter a head of the god was found 
which Pheidias himself might have carved— strength and justice framed in 
the curls of abounding hair and beard. In the Temple of Apollo was a statue 
of Diana, equipped with a hole in the back of the head through which a 
hidden ministrant might utter oracles. In one Herculanean villa enough first- 
class bronzes were found to fill a famous room at the Naples Museum. Pre- 
sumably the masterpieces in this collection— the Resting Mercury, the 
Narcissus or Dionysus, the Drunken Satyr, and the Dancing Faun— were 
of Greek origin or workmanship; they reveal the skillful technique, and the 
shameless joy in the healthy body, characteristic of Praxitelean art. One of 
them, however, a bravely realistic bust in bronze, shows the bald head and 



CAESAR AND CHRIST 


(chap. XXI 


460 

sharp but not unkindly face of L. Caecilius lucundus, a Pompeian auctioneer 
whose accounts, inscribed upon 154 wax tablets, were found in his house 
at Pompeii. Supremely human in its mixture of coarseness and intelligence, 
wisdom and warts, this work of a contemporary— perhaps Italian— sculptor 
is a welcome foil to the unwrinkled gods and goddesses who surround it in 
the Naples Museum, and who confess by their smooth and placid features 
that they never hved. 


III. MUNICIPAL LIFE 

Life, private and public, individual and corporate, has never been lived 
more intensely than in ancient Italy. But the events of our own time are too 
vital and absorbing to let us spare interest for the details of municipal organi- 
zation under the Caesars; the confusing diversities of constitution and the 
jealous gradations of franchise are no longer a part of that living past which 
is our matrix and our theme. 

It was a basic feature of the Roman Empire that though divided into provinces 
it was organized into an assemblage of relatively self-governed city-states each 
owning an extensive hinterland. Patriotism meant love of one’s city rather than 
of the Empire. Normally the freemen of each community were content to exer- 
cise a purely local franchise; and those non-Romans who had won Roman citizen- 
ship rarely went to Rome to vote. As the example of Pompeii shows, the decay of 
the assemblies in the capital was not accompanied by a similar debasement in the 
cities of the Empire. Most Italian municipalities had a senate {curia)— znd most 
Eastern cities had a council {boiile)—thzt formulated ordinances, and an assembly 
{comitia, ekklesia) that chose the magistrates. Each magistrate was expected to 
give his city a substantial sum {sinmna honoraria, from honos, office) for the 
privilege of serving it, and custom required him also to make incidental dona- 
tions for public benefits or games. As no pay attached to office, the democracy— 
or aristocracy— of freemen issued almost everywhere in an oligarchy of wealth 
and power. 

For two hundred years, from Augustus to Aurelius, the municipalities of Italy 
prospered. There was a majority of poor in them, of course; nature and privilege 
had seen to this; but never before or since, so far as history tells, have the rich 
done so much for the poor. Practically all the expenses of operating the city, of 
financing dramas, spectacles, and games, of building temples, theaters, stadiums, 
palaestras, libraries, basilicas, aqueducts, bridges, and baths, and adorning these 
with arches, porticoes, painting, and statuary, fell upon men of means; and in the 
first two centuries of the Empire these philanthropies were carried out with a 
competitive patriotism that in some cases bankrupted the families that con- 
tributed, or the cities that maintained, the benefactions. In time of famine it was 
usual for the wealthy to buy food and distribute it gratis among the poor; on 



ITALY 


CHAP. XXl) 


461 


occasion they furnished free oil or wine, or a public banquet, or a gift of money, 
to all citizens, sometimes to all inhabitants. Extant inscriptions abound in com- 
memorations of such generosity. A millionaire gave Altinum, in Venetia, 1,600,- 
000 sesterces for public baths; a rich lady built a temple and an amphitheater for 
Casinum; Desumius TuUus gave Tarquinii baths costing 5,000,000 sesterces; 
Cremona, destroyed by Vespasian’s troops, was rapidly rebuilt by the contribu- 
tions of private citizens; and two physicians exhausted their fortunes in gifts to 
Naples. At populous Ostia, Lucilius Gemala invited all the inhabitants to dinner, 
paved a long and spacious avenue, repaired or restored seven temples, rebuilt the 
municipal baths, and donated 3,000,000 sesterces to the city treasury It was 
the custom of many rich men to invite a considerable portion of the citizenry to 
a feast on the occasion of their birthday, their election to office, their daughter’s 
marriage, their son’s assumption of the toga virilis of manhood, or the dedication 
of a building which they had presented to the community. In return for such 
favors the city voted the giver an office, a statue, a panegyric, or an inscription. 
The poor were not overwhelmed with all these gifts; they accused the rich of 
deriving the means of philanthropy from exploitation, and they demanded less 
ornate buildings and cheaper com, less statuary and more games.^® 


When we add to private munificence the donations of the emperors to the 
towns, the buildings erected, and the catastrophes mitigated, in them by im- 
perial funds, and the public works and functions financed by the municipal 
treasury, we begin to feel the splendor and pride of the Italian cities under 
the Principate. Streets were paved, drained, policed, and adorned, free 
medical service was maintained for the poor, clean water was piped into 
privatq homes for a small fee, food was offered to the poor at a low price, 
public baths were often free through private subsidies, alimenta were paid 
to straitened families to help them rear their children, schools and libraries 
were built, plays were presented, concerts were given, games were arranged 
in reckless emulation of Rome. Civilization in the Italian towns was not so 
materialistic as in the capital. They rivaled one another in erecting amphi- 
theaters, but also they raised noble temples, sometimes equaling Rome’s 
best,^^ and made the months gay with picturesque religious festivals. They 
spent freely on works of art and provided halls for lecturers, poets, sophists, 
rhetors, philosophers, and musicians. They supplied their citizens with facili- 
ties for health, cleanliness, recreation, and a vigorous cultural life. From 
them, not from Rome, came most of the great Latin authors, and some of the 
finest sculptural masterpieces in our museums, hke the f^ike of Naples, the 
Eros of Centumcellae, the "Leus of Otricoli. They supported as large a popu- 
lation as their modem successors before our century, and gave it an un- 
paralleled security from war. The first two hundred years of our era saw the 
zenith of the great peninsula. 



CHAPTER XXH 


Civilizing the West 


I, ROME AND THE PROVINCES 

T he blot on Italian prosperity— aside from a system of slavery common 
to ancient states— was its partial dependence upon provincial exploita- 
tion. Italy was free of taxation because the provinces had yielded so much 
in plunder and tribute; and to them could be traced some of the wealth 
that came to flower in the Italian towns. Rome, before Caesar, frankly 
classed the provinces as conquered territory; all their inhabitants were 
Roman subjects, only a few were Roman citizens; all their land was the 
property of the Roman state and was held by the possessors on revocable 
grants from the imperial government. To lessen the likelihood of revolt 
Rome cut conquered regions into smaller states, forbade any province to 
have direct pohtical dealings with another, and favored the business classes 
against the lower classes everywhere. Divide et impera was the secret of 
Roman rule. 

Cicero perhaps exaggerated when, in excoriating Verres, he pictured the 
Mediterranean nations as desolate under the Republic: “All the provinces 
mourn, all free peoples cry out, all kingdoms protest against our cruelty and 
greed; from one ocean to another there is no place, however hidden or 
remote, that has not felt our lust and our iniquity.” ^ The Principate dealt 
more liberally with the provinces, not from generosity so much as from 
husbandry. Taxation was made bearable, local religions, languages, and 
customs were respected, freedom of speech was allowed except for attacks 
against the sovereign power, and local laws were retained so far as they 
did not conflict with Roman profit and mastery. A wise flexibility created 
a useful diversity of rank and privilege among and within the subject states. 
Certain municipalities, like Athens and Rhodes, were “free cities”; they 
paid no tribute, were not subject to the provincial governor, and managed 
their domestic affairs without Roman interference so long as they maintained 
social order and peace. Some old kingdoms, hke Numidia and Cappadocia, 
were allowed tc keep their kings, but these were “clients” of Rome— de- 
pendent upon her protection and her policy and required to aid her with 
men and materials at her call. In the provinces the governor (proconsul or 
propraetor) combined in himself the power to legislate, to administer, and 
to judge: his power was limited only by the free cities, by a Roman citizen’s 

462 



CHAP.XXn) CIVILIZING THE WEST 463 

right of appeal to the emperor, and by the financial supervision exercised 
by the provincial quaestor or procurator. Such near-omnipotence invited 
abuse; and though the lengthening of the governor’s term under the Princi- 
pate, his ample salary and allowance, and his financial responsibility to the 
emperor considerably lessened malfeasance, we may see from the letters of 
Pliny and some passages in Tacitus ^ that extortion and corruption were still 
no rarities at the end of the first century. 

Taxation was a primary industry of the governor and his aides. Under 
the Empire a census was taken of every province for the purpose of assessing 
the tax on land and the tax on property— which included animals and slaves. 
To stimulate production a fixed tribute was substituted for the tithe. 
“Publicans” no longer gathered these taxes, but they collected port duties 
and managed some state forests, mines, and public works. The provinces 
were expected to contribute towards a golden crown for each new emperor, 
pay the cost of provincial administration, and in some cases send heavy ship- 
ments of grain to Rome. The old custom of liturgies was maintained in the 
East, and spread through the West, by which the local or the Roman gov- 
ernment might “ask” rich men to provide loans for war, ships for the navy, 
buildings for public purposes, food for famine victims, or choruses for 
festivals and plays. 

Cicero, having joined the Ins, contended that the taxes paid by the prov- 
inces barely covered the cost of administration and defense; ® “defense” 
included the suppression of revolts, and “administration” presumably em- 
braced the perquisites that made so many Roman millionaires. We must 
reconcile ourselves to the probability that whatever power estabhshes 
security and order will send taxgatherers to collect something more than the 
cost. Despite all levies the provinces prospered under the Principate. The 
emperor and the Senate exercised a more careful supervision over provincial 
staffs and severely punished those who stole beyond their station. Ultimately 
the excess taken from the provinces flowed back to them in payment for 
their goods; and in the end the industries so supported made the provinces 
stronger than a precariously parasitic Italy. A government, said Plutarch, 
ought to give a people two boons above all: hberty and peace. “As to 
peace,” he wrote, “there is no need to occupy ourselves, for all war has 
ceased. As to liberty, we have that which the government [Rome] leaves us; 
and perhaps it would not be good if we had any more.” * 

n. AFRICA 

Corsica and Sardinia were classed together as a province, not as parts of Italy. 
Corsica was for the most part a mountainous wilderness, in which Romans 



CAESAR AND CHRIST 


464 


(chap. XXII 


hunted the natives with dogs to sell them as slaves.® Sardinia provided slaves, 
silver, copper, iron, and grain; it had a thousand miles of road and one excellent 
hdrbor, Carales (Cagliari). Sicily had been reduced to an almost purely agricul- 
tural province as one of the “frumentary supports” of Rome; its arable soil was 
largely taken up with latifundia devoted to cattle raising, and manned by slaves 
so poorly clothed and fed that they periodically revolted and escaped to form 
robber bands. The island had in Augustus’ days some 750,000 souls. (In 1930 it 
had 3,972,000.) Of its sixty-five cities the most flourishing were Catania, Syracuse, 
Tauromenium (Taormina), Messana, Agrigentum, and Panormus (Palermo). 
Syracuse and Tauromenium had magnificent Greek theaters, still in use today. 
Despite Verres’ depredations Syracuse was so full of impressive architecture, 
famous sculptures, and historic sites that professional guides prospered on the 
tourist trade,® and Cicero considered it the finest city in the world. Most well- 
to-do urban families had farms or orchards in the suburbs, and the whole Sicilian 
countryside was fragrant with fruit trees and vineyards, as it is today. 


All that Sicily lost through Roman domination Africa gained. It gradually 
replaced Sicily as an unwilling granary for Rome; but in return Roman 
soldiers, colonists, businessmen, and engineers made it blossom into a hardly 
credible affluence. Doubtless the new conquerors had found certain regions 
thriving when they came; between the mountains that frowned upon the 
Mediterranean, and the Atlas range that kept out the Sahara, ran a semi- 
tropical valley sufficiently watered by the Bagradas (Medjerda) River, and 
two months of rain, to repay the patient husbandry that Mago had taught 
and Masinissa had enforced. But Rome improved and expanded what she 
found. Her engineers built dams across the rivers that flowed down from 
the southern hills; they gathered the surplus water in reservoirs in the rainy 
season, and poured it into irrigation canals in the hot months when the 
streams ran dry.^ Rome asked no heavier taxes than native chiefs had levied, 
but her legion and fortifications gave better protection against nomad raiders 
from the mountains; mile by mile new soil was won from desert or savagery 
for cultivation and settlement. The valley produced so much olive oil that 
when in our seventh century the Arabs came, they were amazed to find 
that they could ride from Tripoli to Tangier without ever moving from 
the shade of olive trees.® Towns and cities multiplied, architecture exalted 
them, and literature found new voice. The ruins of Roman forums, temples, 
aqueducts, and theaters on now arid wastes reveal the reach and wealth of 
Roman Africa. Those fields decayed and became dead sand not through a 
change in climate but through a change in government— from a state that 
gave economic security, order, and discipline to one that allowed chaos and 
negligence to ruin the roads, reservoirs, and canals. 

At the head of this restored prosperity was the resurrected city of 



.0 


Ocfa\uj 
C Et^kOlXU 




'XICU^ 






J •^^'■oconii^ 

^ndini un 


m 



of 


iTfORCe' 

J\HH/%f<t^ 





C E R M A N I A 


^ ^ ’^C^olOTtiaA 

r I <i^^^..J^zppineKsis 

. Trevtroruin^ , \ \ 

\ % -— 4 ^ • 

' * t _ 


^uietiii, • 

L UCDUK FNS/s 


I t 1 

« I I 

/ / '-■^' 

I It^quae ^uTe2}jie 


% 




-vT^ . 


D ^ 


C 1 ^ 




' * 




( /V ^ 

i -< - • 




'""'^vi'^ V Troei’^, 

^ 

[.Scrd^ <^'A 


f 




^H,y(Mui> 

■ .15 

/•v,^rs./fl> 5 ll.> — 




✓f 


' • •pO'Y^ ^ 

-111- I * 


"’/’oriae 


P A K 


7 I 

? ' 5 - 


<ry '' 

Y ^'*Av 


CORSICA 


JA/ih/W/A 


,^Ser^ 7 \ / v'^ \ ' * 

>"■" Aff ' A" '-;r^-7 


C / / ATRO! 

LAy .« 


F P / /4 




A TROPOTPM E‘ 


,0^ 




Ca.ria. 

Caesay-ea. 


^A 7 ^ 


‘Jn,. “TAiA-cuAn^ 


”T\( 

S(/aL^ 

gSi 

CJ5 r'l^^'ifJl 


TCippo , , 

mDieurrf^tuS 
^f\JltiaZy 


Carifui^^ 


SICIxLIA 



— AtaN 

M A U R ^ — '■ 



I %CirlcL. \ ^ 

/ ^MculduTiL. ^(adruynetu.'my ^ ^ 

——Lambaysis • •ThAtn 

y 

\ Nr 


ULeptis y^agnAi 




CiC>^ 

CRETA 






,cv>^' 


'\ >1 £ c y 


>f \\W*7' 

■lTS .17‘^^/ 

?.‘32£ i* 

TTpr^ / j 

%P^*-Vc ^ B I ^ « 

V • ^ -. . R‘ A ^ . Ik * 

*‘'>x'p^^«#"' 


5" 




\N 


r ty 6* 






ROMAN EMPIRE 


-^/V O p I A 



CIVILIZING THE WEST 


CHAP. XXIl) 


465 


Carthage. After the battle of Actium Augustus took up the frustrated project 
of Caius Gracchus and Caesar and sent to Carthage as colonists some of the 
soldiers whose fidelity and victories he wished to reward with land. The 
geographical advantages of the site, the perfect harbor, the fertile Bagradas 
delta, the excellent roads opened or reopened by Roman engineers, soon 
enabled Carthage to recapture from Utica the export and import trade of 
the region; within a century of its refounding it had become the largest city 
in the western provinces. Rich merchants and landowners built mansions 
on the historic Byrsa, or villas in the flowering suburbs, while peasants driven 
from the soil by the competition of latifundia joined prolctaires and slaves 
in slums whose fetid poverty would welcome the egalitarian gospel of 
Christianity. Houses rose to six or seven stories, public buildings gleamed 
with marble, and statuary of good Greek style abounded in the streets and 
squares. Temples were built again to the old Carthaginian gods, and Alelkart 
enjoyed till our second centur)' the sacrifice of living children.® The people 
rivaled the Romans in their passion for luxuries, cosmetics, jewelry, dyed 
hair, chariot races, and gladiatorial games. Among the sights of the city were 
the great public baths presented by Marcus Aurelius. There were lecture 
halls, schools of rhetoric, philosophy, medicine, and law; Carthage ranked 
only after Athens and Alexandria as a university town. Here Apuleius and 
Tertullian came to study everything, and Saint Augustine mangled at the 
pranks and immorality of the students, whose favorite philanthropy was to 
break into a lecture room and dismiss both the professor and his class.^“ 


Carthage was the capital of the province called “Africa,” now eastern Tunisia. 
South of it commerce bedecked the eastern coast with cities whose ancient 
wealth was reviving after tw elve centuries when war struck them in our time: 
Hadrumetum (Sousse), Leptis Minor, Thapsus, and Tacapae (Gabes). Farther 
east on the Mediterranean lay a district named Tripolis from its federation of 
three cities: Oea (Tripoli), founded by the Phoenicians in 900 r.c., Sabrata, and 
Leptis Magna (Lebda). In this last city the Emperor Septimius Severus was born 
(a.d. 146) ;\e rewarded it with a basilica and municipal bath whose ruins astonish 
' the traveler or warrior today. Paved roads busy with camel caravans connected 
these ports with the towns of the interior: Sufetula, now a tiny village with the 
remains of a great Roman temple; Thysdrus (El Djem), which had an amphi- 
theater seating 60,000; and Thugga (Dougga), whose ruined theater attests, by 
its graceful Corinthian columns, the wealth and taste of its citizens. 

North of Carthage was her ancient mother and implacable rival, Utica 
(Utique) We catch a hint of its Roman opulence when we learn that in 46 b.c. 
300 Romzn bankers and wholesalers had branch offices there.^^ Its territory 
reached northward to Hippo Diarrhytus, now Bizerte; thence a road led along 
the coast westward to Hippo Regius (Bone), soon to be Augustine s episcopal 



4<56 CAESAR AND CHRIST (CHAP. XXH 

see. South and inland lay Cirta (Constantine), capital of the province of Nu- 
midia. Westward lay Thamugadi (Timgad), almost as well preserved as Pompeii, 
with paved and colonnaded streets, covered drains, an elegant arch, a forum, 
senate house, basilica, temples, baths, theater, library, and many private homes. 
On the pavement of the forum is a checkerboard engraved with the words, 
Venari, lavari, ludere, rider e, hoc est vivere— ‘to hunt, bathe, play, and laugh, 
this is to live.” Thamugadi was founded about a.d. i 17 by the Third Legion, 
sole guard of the African provinces. About 1 2 3 the legion took up more perma- 
nent headquarters a few miles to the west, and raised the city of Lambaesis (Lam- 
bese). The soldiers married and settled there, and lived in their homes more than 
in the camp; but even their praetorittm was a stately and ornate edifice, whose 
baths were as fine as any in Africa. Outside the camp they helped to build a 
capitol, temples, triumphal arches, and an amphitheater where struggle and 
death might mitigate the monotony of their peaceful lives. 

That a single legion could protect all north Africa from the marauding tribes 
of the interior was made possible by a network of roads, military in purpose but 
commercial in result, binding Carthage with the Atlantic, and the Sahara with 
the Mediterranean. The main road went westward through Cirta to Caesarea, 
capital of Mauretania (Morocco). Here King Juba 11 taught civilization to the 
Mauri or Moors from whom the province took its ancient and modem names. 
Son of the Juba who had died at Thapsus, he had been taken as a child to grace 
Caesar’s triumph in Rome; he was spared, remained as a student, and became one 
of the most learned scholars of his time. Augustus made him client king of Maure- 
tania and bade him spread among his people the classic culture he had so zealously 
acquired. He succeeded, being favored with a long reign of forty-eight years; 
his subjects marveled that a man could write books and yet rule so well. His son 
and heir was brought to Rome and starved to death by Caligula. Claudius an- 
nexed the kingdom and divided it into two provinces: Mauretania Caesariensis 
and Mauretania Tingitana, named from its capital Tingis— our Tangier. 

In these African cities there were many schools, open to the poor as well 
as to the rich. We hear of courses in stenography,^® and Juvenal calls Africa 
nutricula cmsidiconim—tho nurse of oarristers.^^ It produced in this period 
one minor and one major author— Pronto and Apuleius; only in its Christian 
heyday would African literature lead the world. Lucius Apuleius was a 
strange and picturesque character, far more than Montaigne “undulant and 
diverse.” Bom at Madaura of high family (a.d. 124), he studied there, at 
Carthage, and in Athens, spent a large inheritance recklessly, wandered from 
city to city and from faith to faith, had himself initiated into various relio-ious 
mysteries, played with magic, wrote many works on subjects ranging from 
theology to tooth powder, lecmred at Rome and elsewhere on philosophy 
and religion, returned to Africa, and married at Tripoli a lady considerably 
richer than himself in both purse and years. Her friends and heirs-apparent 



CIVILIZING THE WEST 


CHAP. XXIl) 


467 


sued to annul the marriage, charging that he had persuaded the widow by 
magic arts; he defended himself before the court in an Apologia that has 
come down to us in refurbished form. He won his case and bride, but the 
people persisted in believing him a magician, and their pagan posterity sought 
to belittle Christ by recounting the miracles of Apuleius. He spent the re- 
mainder of his days at Madaura and Carthage, practicing law and medicine, 
letters and rhetoric. Most of his writings were on scientific and philosophical 
subjects; his native city raised a monument to him labeled PMlosophus 
Platonicus; and he would be chagrined, if he could return, to find himself 
remembered only for his Golden Ass. 

It is a work akin to the Satyricon of Petronius and even more bizarre. 
Originally entitled Metafnorphoseon Libri XI— Eleven Books of Trans- 
formations— \t expanded fantastically a story that Lucius of Patras had told 
of a man changed into an ass. It is a loose concatenation of adventures, 
descriptions, and extraneous episodes, seasoned with magic, horror, ribaldry, 
and deferred piety. The Lucius of the tale tells how he wandered into 
Thessaly, amused himself with various maidens, and sensed everywhere 
around him an atmosphere of sorcery. 

As soon as night was past and a new day began to spring, I for- 
tuned to awake, and rose out of my bed as half amazed, and indeed 
desirous to know and see some strange and marvelous things. , . . 
Neither was there anything which I saw that I did believe to be the 
same which it was indeed, but everything seemed to me transformed 
into other shapes by the wicked power of enchantment, in so much 
that I thought the stones against which I might stumble were indurate 
and turned from men into that figure, and that the birds which I heard 
chirping, and the trees and the running waters were changed into such 
feathers and leaves and fountains. And further I thought that the 
statues and images would by and by move, and that the walls would 
talk, and the kine and other brute beasts would speak and. tell strange 
news, and that immediately I should hear some oracle from heaven 
and from the ray of the sun.^® 

Ready now for any adventure, Lucius rubs himself with a magic ointment, 
meanwhile mightily wishing to be changed into a bird; but as he rubs he 
becomes a perfect ass. Thenceforth the story records the tribulations of an 
ass w'ith “the sense and understanding of a man.” His single consolation lies 
in his “long ears, whereby I might hear all things that were even afar off.” 
He will be restored to human shape, he is told, if he can find and eat a rose. 
He achieves this consummation after a long Asineid of vicissitudes. Dis- 
enamored of life, he turns first to philosophy, then to religion, and composes 
a prayer of thanksgiving to Isis astonishingly hke a Christian apostrophe to 



CAESAR AND CHRIST 


468 


(chap. XXII 


the Mother of God.^® He shaves his head, is received into the third order of 
Isiac initiates, and paves a road back to earth by reveahng a dream in which 
Osiris, “greatest of the gods,” bids him go home and practice law. 

Few books embrace so much nonsense, but fewer still have phrased it so 
pleasantly. Apuleius tries every manner of style and manages each success- 
fully; he loves most a rich and fanciful verbiage ornate with alliteration and 
assonance, picturesque slang and archaic speech, sentimental diminutives, 
rhythmic and sometimes poetic prose. An Oriental warmth of coloring ac- 
companies here an Oriental mysticism and sensuahty. Perhaps Apuleius 
wished to suggest, from the background of his experience, that sensual 
indulgence is an intoxicating ferment which changes us into beasts, and that 
we can become human again only through the rose of wisdom and piety. He 
is at his best in the incidental stories caught by his powerful and perambulat- 
ing ears; so an old woman comforts a kidnaped maiden by recounting the 
romance of Cupid and Psyche— how the son of Venus fell in love with a 
pretty maid, gave her every joy but that of seeing him, aroused his mother 
to cruel jealousy, and came to a happy ending in the skies. No artist’s brush, 
in many an effort, has bettered the hoar shrew’s tongue in telling the ancient 
tale. 


III. SPAIN 

Crossing the straits from Tangier, we pass from one of the newest to 
one of the oldest provinces of Rome. Standing strategically at the door of 
the Mediterranean, blessed and cursed with precious minerals that soaked 
her soil with the blood of greed, crossed with mountain ranges that hindered 
communications, assimilation, and unity, Spain has felt the full fever of life 
from the days when Old Stone Age artists painted bisons on the cave walls 
of Altamira down to our own disordered time. For thirty centuries the 
Spaniards have been a proud and warlike people, lean and tough, stoically 
brave, passionate and obstinate, sober and melancholy, frugal and hospitable, 
courteous and chivalrous, easily provoked to hatred, more easily to love. 
When the Romans came they found a population even then inextricably 
diverse: Iberians from Africa (?), Ligurians from Italy, Celts from Gaul, 
and a layer of Carthaginians at the top. If we may believe their conquerors! 
the pre-Roman Spaniards were close to barbarism, some living in towns and 
houses, some in hamlets and huts and caves, sleeping on the floor or the 
earth, and washing their teeth with urine carefully aged.^® The men wore 
black cloaks, the women “long m.antles and gay-colored gowns.” In some 
parts, Strabo reprovingly adds, “the women dance promiscuously with men 
taking hold of their hands.” 



CIVILIZING THE WEST 


CHAP. XXII ) 


469 


As early as 2000 b.c. the inhabitants of southeastern Spain— Tartessus, the 
Phoenician “Tarshish”— had developed a bronze industry whose products 
were sold throughout* the Mediterranean. On this basis Tartessus evolved 
in the sixth century b.c. a literature and art that claimed an antiquity of 
6000 years. Little remains of it except a few crude statues and a strange 
polychrome bust in sandstone, The Lady of Elche, carved on Greek models 
in a strong and flowing Celtic style. About 1000 b.c. the Phoenicians began 
to tap the mineral wealth of Spain, and by 800 they had taken Cadiz and 
Malaga, and built great temples there. Towards 500 b.c. Greek colonists 
settled along the northeastern coast. About the same time the Carthaginians, 
summoned by their Phoenician kin to help suppress a revolt, conquered 
Tartessus and all south and eastern Spain. The rapid exploitation of the 
peninsula by Carthage between the First and Second Punic Wars opened 
the eyes of the Romans to the resources of what they then called “Iberia,” 
and the passage of Hannibal into Italy was finally outweighed by the move- 
ment of the Scipios into Spain. The disunited tribes fought fiercely for their 
independence; women killed their children rather than let them fall into 
Roman hands, and captive natives sang their war songs while dying on the 
cross.^® The conquest took two centuries, but once completed it proved 
more fundamental than in most other provinces. The Gracchi, Caesar, and 
Augustus changed the Republic’s policy of ruthlessness to one of courtesy 
and consideration, with good and lasting results. Romanization proceeded 
rapidly; Latin was adopted and adapted, the economy expanded and pros- 
pered, and soon Spain was contributing poets, philosophers, senators, and 
emperors to Rome. 

From Seneca to Aurehus Spain was the economic mainstay of the Empire. 
Having enriched Tyre and then Carthage, Spanish minerals now enriched 
Rome; Spain became to Italy what Mexico and Peru would be to Spain. 
Gold, silver, copper, tin, iron, lead were mined with modem thoroughness; 
at Rio Tinto one may still see Roman shafts sunk to great depths through 
soHd quartz, and Roman slag with an astonishingly low percentage of copper 
left in it.-^ In these mines slaves and prisoners worked day after day, in many 
cases never seeing the light of the sun for months.-^ Great metallurgical 
industries rose near the mines. Meanwhile the soil of Spain, despite mountains 
and arid wastes, produced esparto grass for cord, rope, baskets, bedding, and 
sandals, nourished prize sheep and a renowned woolen industry, and gave 
to the Empire the best ohves, oil, and wine that antiquity knew. The Guadal- 
quivir, the Tagus, the Ebro, and lesser streams helped a web of Roman roads 
to carry the products of Spain to her ports and innumerable towns. 

Indeed, the most remarkable and characteristic result of Roman rule, here 
as elsewhere, was the multiphcation or expansion of cities. In the province 



CAESAR AND CHRIST 


470 


(chap. XXII 


of Baetica (Andalusia) were Carteia (Algeciras), Munda, Malaca, Italica 
(birthplace of Trajan and Hadrian), Corduba, Hispalis (Seville), and Cades 
(Cadiz). Corduba, founded 152 b.c. was a literary center famous for its 
schools of rhetoric; here were bom Lucan, the Senecas, and Saint Paul’s 
Gallio; this tradition of scholarship would last through the Dark Ages and 
make Cordova the most learned city in Europe. Cades was the most popu- 
lous of Spanish towns, and notoriously rich; situated at the mouth of the 
Guadalquivir, it commanded the Atlantic trade with western Africa, Spain, 
Gaul, and Britain. Its sensuous dancing girls (puellae Gaditmae) contributed 
modestly to its fame. 

Rome knew Portugal as the province of Lusitania, and Lisbon as Olisipo. 
At Norba Caesarina, to which the Arabs gave its present name of Alcantara 
(The Bridge), Trajan’s engineers threw across the Tagus the most perfect 
of existing Roman bridges; its majestic arches, 100 feet wide and 180 above 
the stream, still carry a busy four-lane road. The capital of Lusitania was 
Emerita (Merida), which boasted many temples, three aqueducts, a circus, 
a theater, a naumachia, and a bridge 2500 feet long. Farther east, in the 
province of Tarraconensis, Segovia still enjoys the pure water brought in 
by an aqueduct built in Trajan’s reign. South of it was Toletum (Toledo), 
known in Roman times for its ironworks. On the eastern coast rose the great 
city of Nova Carthago (Cartagena), rich with mining, fisheries, and trade. 
Out in the Mediterranean lay the Baleares, where Palma and Pollentia were 
already old and flourishing cities. Northward on the coast were Valentia, 
Tarraco (Tarragona), Barcino (Barcelona), and, just below the Pyrenees, 
the old Greek town of Emporiae. A short sail around the eastern end of the 
mountains, and the traveler found himself in Gaul. 


rv. GAXJL 

In those days, when all ships were of moderate draught, even ocean-going 
vessels could navigate the Rhone from Marseilles to Lyons; smaller boats 
could continue to within thirty miles of the upper Rhine; after a short haul 
over level land goods could sail by a hundred cities and a thousand villas into 
the North Sea. Similar overland leaps led from the Rhone and the Saone to 
the Loire and the Atlantic, from the Aude to the Garonne and Bordeaux, 
from the Saone to the Seine and the English Channel. Trade followed these 
waterways and created cities at their meeting points. France, like Egypt, 
was the gift of her streams. 

In a sense French civilization began with “Aurignacian man” 30,000 years 
before Christ; for even then, as the caves of Montignac attest, there were 



CHAP.Xxn) CIVILIZING THE WEST 47^ 

artists capable of rich color and vivid line. From that Old Stone Age of 
hunting and herding, France passed, about 12,000 b.c., to the settled life 
and tillage of the Neolithic Age, and, after ten long millenniums, to the Age 
of Bronze. About 900 b.c. a new race, “Alpine” and roundheaded, began to 
filter in from Germany and spread across France to Britain and Ireland and 
down into Spain. These “Celts” brought with them the Halstatt iron culture 
of Austria, and about 550 b.c. they imported from Switzerland the more 
developed iron technology of La Tene. When Rome became conscious of 
France she named it Celtic a; only in Caesar’s time was this changed to 
Gallia, Gaul. 

The immigrants conquered or outbred the natives and settled down in 
independent tribes whose names still lurk in the cities they built.* The Gauls, 
said Caesar, were tall, muscular, and strong;*® they combed their rich blond 
hair back over their heads and down the nape of their necks; some had 
beards, many had powerful mustaches curling around their mouths. They 
had brought from the East, perhaps from the ancient Iranians, the custom 
of wearing breeches; to these they added tunics dyed in many colors and 
embroidered with flowers, and striped cloaks fastened at the shoulders. They 
loved jewelry and wore gold ornaments— even if nothing else— in war.** 
They liked abundant meat, beer, and undiluted wine, being “intemperate 
by nature” if we may believe Appian.^® Strabo calls them “simple and high- 
spirited, boastful . . . insufferable when victorious, scared out of their wits 
when defeated”; but it is not always a boon that our enemies should write 
a book. Poseidonius was shocked to find that they hung the severed heads 
of their foes from the necks of their horses.®^ They were easily aroused to 
argument and combat, and sometimes, to amuse themselves at banquets, 
they fought duels to the death. “They were,” says Caesar, “our equals in 
valor and warlike zeal.” Ammianus Marcellinus describes them as 

at all ages fit for military service. The old man marches out on a 
campaign with courage equal to that of the man in the prime of life. 

... In fact a whole band of foreigners will be unable to cope with 
one Gaul if he call in his wife, who is usually far stronger and fiercer 
than he, above all when she swells her neck, gnashes her teeth, and 
poising her huge arms, begins to rain down blows and kicks like shots 
from a catapult.*® 

The Gauls believed in a variety of gods, now too dead to mind anonymity. 
Belief in a pleasant life after death was so keen as to be in Caesar’s judgment 
an important source of Gallic bravery. On the strength of it, says Valerius 

* The Ambiani in Amiens, Bellovaci in Beauvais, Bituriges in Bourges, Camutes in Chartres, 
Parish in Paris, Pictones in Poiriers, Remi in Rheims, Senones in Sens, Suessiones in Soissons, 
etc. 



CAESAR AND CHRIST 


472 


(chap. XXII 


Maximus, men lent money to be repaid in heaven; and Poseidonius claimed to 
have seen Gauls at a funeral write letters to their friends in the other world 
and throw them upon the pyre so that the dead man might deliver them;®“ 
we should enjoy a Gaul’s opinion of these Roman tales. A priestly class, the 
Druids, controlled all education and vigorously inculcated religious belief. 
They conducted a colorful ritual, in sacred groves more often than in 
temples; and to appease the gods they offered human sacrifice of men con- 
demned to death for crime; the custom will appear barbarous to those who 
have not seen an electrocution. The Druids v'ere the only learned, perhaps 
the only literate, part of the community. They composed hymns, poems, and 
historical records; they studied “the stars and their movements, the size of 
the universe and the earth, and the order of natnre,” and formulated a 
practicable calendar. They served as judges and had great influence at the 
courts of the tribal kings. Pre-Roman, like medieval, Gaul was a political 
feudalism clothed in theocracy. 

Under these kings and priests Celtic Gaul reached its zenith in the fourth 
century b.c. Population expanded with the productivity of the La Tene 
techniques, and the result was a series of wars for land. About 400 b.c. the 
Celts, who already held most of central Europe as well as Gaul, conquered 
Britain, Spain, and north Italy. In 390 they pushed south to Rome; in 278 
they pillaged Delphi and conquered Phrygia. A century later their vigor 
began to wane, partly through the softening influence of wealth and Greek 
ways, partly through the political atomism of feudal barons. Just as in 
medieval France the kings broke the power of the barons and established a 
unified state, conversely, in the century before Caesar, the lords of the 
manors broke the power of the kings and left Gaul more fragmentary than 
before. The Celtic front was pushed back ever}Avhere except in Ireland; the 
Carthaginians subdued the Celts in Spain, the Romans drove them out of 
Italy, the Cimbri and Teutones overran them in Germany and southern 
Gaul. In 12,5 B.c. the Romans, eager to control the road to Spain, conquered 
southern Gaul and made it a Roman province. In 58 b.c. the Gallic leaders 
begged Caesar to help them repel a German invasion. Caesar complied and 
named his own reward. 


Caesar and Augustus reorganized Gaul into four provinces: Gallia Narbon- 
ensis in the south, known to the Romans as provincia, and to us as Provence, 
then largely Hellenized through the Greek settlements on the Mediterranean 
coast; Aquitania in the southwest, chiefly Iberian in population; in the center 
Gallia Lugdunensis, overwhelmingly Celtic; and in the northeast Belgica, pre- 
dominantly German. Rome recognized and abetted these ethnic divisions to fore- 
stall united revolt. The tribal cantons were retained as administrative areas; the 



CIVILIZING THE WEST 


473 


CHAP. XXIl) 

magistrates were chosen by owners of property, whose allegiance was secured 
by Rome’s support of them against the lower classes; and Roman citizenship was 
granted as a prize to loyal and useful Gauls. A provincial assembly of repre- 
sentatives chosen from every canton met each year in Lyons; at first it limited 
itself cautiously to the ritual of Augustan worship, but soon it passed on to 
sending requests to the Roman governors, then recommendation^, then demands. 
The administration of justice was taken out of the hands of the Druids, who were 
suppressed, and France received Roman law. For almost a century Gaul sub- 
mitted peacefully to the new yoke; for a moment in a.d. 68 , and again in 71, 
revolt flared under Vindex and Civilis; but the people gave scant support to these 
movements, and the love of hberty yielded to the enjoyment of prosperity, se- 
curity, and peace. 

Under the Pax Romana Gaul became one of the richest parts of the Empire. 
Rome marveled at the wealth of the Galhc nobles who entered the Senate under 
Claudius, and a century later Florus contrasted the flourishing economy of 
Gaul with the decline of Italy.®® Forests were cleared, swamps were drained, 
agriculture was improved even to the introduction of a mechanical reaper,®^ 
and the grape and the olive spread into every canton of Gaul. Already in the first 
century Pliny and Columella praised the wines of Burgundy and Bordeaux, 
There were large estates tilled by serfs and slaves and owned by the forerunners 
of medieval feudal lords; but there were also many small proprietors, and wealth 
was more evenly distributed in ancient Gaul, as in modem France, than in almost 
any other civilized state. Progress was especially rapid in industry. By a.d. 200 
Gallic potters and ironworkers were stealing the markets of Germany and the 
West from Italy, Gallic weavers were doing the largest textile business in the 
Empire, and the factories of Lyons were turning out not only commercial glass, 
but wares of artistic excellence.®® Industrial techniques were handed down from 
father to son and formed a precious part of the classical heritage. Over 13,000 
miles of road, built or improved by Roman engineers, teemed with transport 
and trade. 

Enriched with this expanded economic life, the towns of ancient Celtica be- 
came the cities of Roman Gaul. In Aquitania the capital, Burdigala (Bordeaux), 
was one of the busiest of Atlantic ports; Limonum (Limoges), Avaricum 
(Bourges), and Augustonemetum (Clermont-Eerrand) were already rich; the 
last paid Zenodotus 400,000 sesterces for a colossus of Alercury.®® In Gallia Nar- 
bonensis there were so many cities that Phny described it as “more like Italy 
than a province.” Farthest west was Tolosa (Toulouse), famous for its schools. 
Narbo (Narbonne), capital of the province, was in our first centurj^ the greatest 
city of Gaul, the chief port of exit for Gallic goods to Italy and Spain; “here,” 
Sidonius ApoUinaris would say, “are walls, promenades, taverns, arches, porti- 
coes, a forum, a theater, temples, baths, markets, meadows, lakes, a bridge, and 
the sea.” ®® Farther east, on the great Via Domitia from Spain to Italy, lay 
Nemausus (Nimes). Its pretty Maison Carree was raised by Augustus and the 
town to commemorate his grandsons Lucius and Caius Caesar; its inner colonnade 



CAESAR AND CHRIST 


474 


(chap. XXII 


is lamentably sunk into the cella wall, but its free Corinthian columns are as 
lovely as any in Rome. The amphitheater, which seated 20,000, is still the scene of 
periodical pageantry. The Roman aqueduct that brought Nimes fresh water 
became in time the Pont du Card, or Bridge of the Card River; standing today 
as a gigantic ruin in the rugged countryside beyond the city, its massive lower 
arches contrast to fine effect with the smaller arches above them to make the 
structure a revealing witness of Rome’s engineering art. 

Eastward on the Mediterranean, at the mouth of the Rhone, Caesar founded 
Axelate (Arles), in the hope that it would replace rebellious Massalia as a ship- 
building center and port. Massalia (Marseilles), already old when Caesar was 
bom, remained Greek in language and culture until his death. Through its 
harbor Hellenic agriculture, arboriculture, viticulture, and culture had entered 
Gaul; here, above all, western Europe exchanged its goods for those of the classic 
world. It was one of the great university centers of the Empire, especially re- 
nowned for its school of law. It declined after Caesar, but maintained its ancient 
status as a free city, independent of the provincial governor. Farther east were 
Forum lulii (Frejus), Antipolis (Antibes), and Nicaea (Nice)— this in the little 
province of the Maritime Alps. Sailing up the Rhone from Arelate the traveler 
came to Avenio (Avignon) and Arausio (Orange); here a powerful arch sur- 
vives from Augustus’ days, and an immense Roman theater still hears ancient 
plays. 

The largest of the Gallic provinces was Gallia Lugdunensis, named from Lug- 
dunum (Lyons), its capital. Situated at the confluence of the Rhone and the 
Saone, and at the crossing of great highways built by Agrippa, the city became 
the trading center of a rich region and the capital of aU Gaul. Iron, glass, and 
ceramic industries helped to sustain a population of 200,000 in our first century 
Northward lay Cabillonum (Chalon-sur-Saone), Caesarodunum (Tours), Au- 
gustodunum (Aumn), Cenabum (Orleans), and Lutetia (Paris). “I have spent 
the winter” (357-58), writes the Emperor Julian, “in our beloved Lutetia, for so 
the Gauls term the little town of the Parish, a small island in the river. 

Good wine is grown here.” 

Belgica, which included parts of France and Switzerland, was almost entirely 
agricultural; its industry was for the most part attached to the villas whose 
numerous remains suggest a baronial life of comfort and luxur)-. Here Augustus 
founded the cities now known as Soissons, St. Quentin, Senlis, Beauvais and 
Treves. The last, Augusta Trevirorum, rose to prominence as the headquarters of 
the army defending the Rhine; under Diocletian it replaced Lyons as the capital 
of Gaul, and in the fifth century it was the greatest city north of the Alps. It is 
still rich in classic remains-the Porta Nigra in its Roman wall, the Baths of St. 
Barbara, the Tomb of the Secundini family at nearby Igel, and the crude reliefs 
on the fortress blocks of neighboring Neumagen. 


In and around these towns life slowly changed its surface and obstinately 
renewed its elements. The Gauls kept their character, their breeches, and 



CIVILIZING THE WEST 


CHAP. XXIl) 


475 


for three centuries their language. Latin triumphed in the sixth century, 
chiefly through its use by the Roman Church, but it was already being 
clipped and nosed into French. In Gaul Rome achieved her greatest triumph 
in the transmission of civilization. Great French historians hke Julhan and 
Funck-Brentano have thought that France would have fared better with- 
out the Roman conquest, but a still greater historian believed that the Roman 
conquest was the sole alternative to a German conquest of Gaul. If Caesar 
had not won there, says Mommsen, 

the migration of peoples would have occurred 400 years sooner than 
it did, and would have come at a time when Italian civilization had not 
become naturalized either in Gaul, or on the Danube, or in Africa and 
Spain. Inasmuch as the great Roman general and statesman with sure 
glance perceived in the German tribes the rival antagonists of the 
Romano-Greek world; inasmuch as with firm hand he established 
the new system of aggressive defense, down even to its details, and 
taught men to protect the frontiers of the Empire by rivers and artifi- 
cial ramparts ... he gained for the Greco-Roman culture the in- 
terval necessary to civilize the West.^^ 

The Rhine was the frontier between classic and primitive civilization. 
Gaul could not defend that frontier; Rome did; and that fact determined the 
history of Europe to this day. 


V. BRITAIN 

About 1200 B.c. a branch of the Celts crossed over from Gaul and settled 
in England. They found there a mingled population of dark-haired people, 
possibly Iberian, and light-haired Scandinavians. They conquered these na- 
tives, married them, and spread through England and Wales. About 100 b.c. 
(for so the egocentric foreshortening of history telescopes eventful cen- 
turies, and erases vital generations from a crowded memory) another branch 
of Celts came from the Continent and dispossessed their kinsmen of southern 
and eastern Britain. When Caesar came he found the island peopled by several 
independent tribes, each with its expansive king. He gave to all the popula- 
tion the name Britamii, from a Gallic tribe, so called, just south of the Chan- 
nel, in the belief that the same tribe inhabited both shores. 

Celtic Britain was in customs, language, and religion essentially like 
Celtic Gaul, but its civilization was less advanced. It passed from bronze to 
iron some six centuries before Christ, three centuries after Gaul. Pytheas, the 
Massihot explorer, sailing the Atlantic to England about 350 b.c., found the 



CAESAR AND CHRIST 


476 


(chap, xxii 


Cantii of Kent already prosperous with agriculture and trade. The soil was 
fertile from abundant rain and contained rich ores of copper, iron, tin, and 
lead. By Caesar’s time domestic industry was able to supply an active com- 
merce among the tribes and with the Continent, and coins were minted in 
bronze and gold.^“ His invasions were reconnaissance raids; he brought back 
the double assurance that the tribes were incapable of united resistance and 
that the crops were adequate to feed an invading army coming at the proper 
time. A century later (a.d. 43) Claudius crossed the Channel with 40,000 
men whose discipline, armament, and skill proved too much for the natives; 
Britain in her turn became a Roman province. In 6 1 a British tribal queen, 
Boudicca or Boadicea, led a furious revolt, alleging that Roman officers had 
ravished both her daughters, plundered her realm, and sold many of its free- 
men into slavery. While the Roman governor Paulinus was busy conquering 
the Isle of Man, Boudicca’s army overcame the single legion that opposed it 
and marched upon Londinium— already, says Tacitus, “the chief residence of 
merchants, and a great mart of trade.” Every Roman found there or in 
Verulamium (St. Albans) was killed; 70,000 Romans and their allies were 
slain before Paulinus and his legions caught up with the rebel force. Boudicca, 
standing with her daughters in a chariot, fought heroically in defeat. She 
drank poison, and 80,000 Britons were put to the sword. 


Tacitus tells how his son-in-law Agricola, as governor of Britain (a.d. 78-84), 
brought civilization to a “rude, scattered, and warlike people” by establishing 
schools, spreading the use of Latin, and encouraging cities and rich men to build 
temples, basilicas, and public baths. “By degrees,” says the caustic historian, “the 
charms of vice gained admission to British hearts; baths, porticoes, and elegant 
banquets grew into vogue; and the new manners, which in reality onlv served 
to sweeten slavery, were by the unsuspecting Britons called the arts of "polished 
humanity.” In swift campaigns Agricola carried these arts, and Roman rule, 
to the Clyde and the Forth, defeated an army of 30,000 Scots, and wished to go 
farther when Domitian recalled him. Hadrian built a wall (122-27) seventy mUes 
across the island from Solway Firth to the mouth of the Tyne as a defense against 
not-unsuspecting Scots; and uventy years later Lollius raised farther north the 
thirty-three-mile Wall of Antoninus between the firths of Clyde and Forth. For 
over two centuries these fortifications kept Britain safe for Rome. 

As Rome’s rule achieved stability it became more lenient. The cities were man- 
aged by native senates, assemblies, and magistrates, and the countr)- side was left, 
as in Gaul, to tribal chieftains amenable to Roman sur\"eillance. It was not so 
urban a civilization as Italy’s, nor so rich as Gaul’s; but it was under Roman 
stimulus and protection that most British cities now took form. Four of them 
were Roman “colonies,” whose freemen enjoyed Roman citizenship: Camulo- 
dunum (Colchester), the first Roman capital of Britain, and the seat of the 



CIVILIZING THE WEST 


477 


CHAP. XXIl) 

provincial council; Lindum, whose modem name lAncoln declares its ancient 
privilege; Eboracum (York), an important military post; and Glevum, whose 
name Gloucester merges Glevum with Chester, the Anglo-Saxon word for town.* 
Chester, Winchester, Dorchester, Chichester, Leicester, Silchester, and Man- 
chester appear to have had their beginnings in the first two centuries of Roman 
rule. These were small towns, each with some 6000 souls; but they had paved and 
drained streets, forums, basilicas, temples, and houses with stone foundations and 
tiled roofs. Viroconium ( Wroxeter) had a basilica accommodating 6000 persons, 
and public baths where hundreds could bathe at once. The hot springs of Aquae 
Salis (“Salt Waters”), now Bath, made it a fashionable resort in ancient days, as 
its surviving thermae show. Londinium rose to economic and military importance 
because of its position on the Thames and its radiating roads. It grew to a popu- 
lation of 60,000 and soon replaced Camulodunum as Britain’s capital.'’® 

Most of the homes in Roman London were of brick and stucco, in smaller 
towms, of wood. Climate determined their architecture: a gable roof to shed 
rain and snow, and many windows to let in whatever sun might shine; for even 
“on clear days,” said Strabo, “the sun is to be seen only for three or four hours.” ®® 
But interiors followed the Roman stvle— mosaic floors, large bathrooms, muraled 
walls, and (far more than in Italian homes) central heating by hot-air conduits 
in walls and floors. Coal— mined from surface veins— was used not only for warm- 
ing houses but for industrial processes like smelting lead. Apparently the mines of 
ancient Britain were owned by the state, but were leased to private entrepre- 
neurs.®^ There was a factory (fabrica) at Bath for the manufacture of iron 
weapons,®® and probably the making of pottery, bricks, and tiles had reached 
the factory stage; but most industries were carried on in homes, small shops, and 
vUlas. Five thousand miles of Roman roads, and innumerable waterv'ays, were 
the arteries of a brisk internal trade. A modest foreign commerce, inverting the 
custom of Britain today, exported raw materials for manufactured goods. 

How deeply did Roman civilization, in its four centuries of domination, 
penetrate the life and soul of Britain? Latin became the language of politics, 
law, literature, and the educated minority, but in the countryside and among 
many workers in the towns the Celtic tongue survived; even now', in Wales 
and the Isle of Man, it holds its own. Roman schools in Britain spread literacy 
and determined the Roman form of the English alphabet; and a stream of 
Latin words poured into English speech. Temples were built to Roman gods, 
but the common man cherished his Celtic deities and feasts. Even in the cities 
Rome sank no lasting roots. The people submitted apathetically to a rule that 
brought them a fructifying peace and such prosperity as the island would not 
experience again until the Industrial Revolution. 

* So Haverfieldps the more widely accepted derivation is from the Latin castrum, fortress, 
or castra, camp. Most Roman-British towns were designed on the chessboard plan of a 
Roman camp. 



478 


CAESAR AND CHRIST 


(chap. XXII 


VI. THE BARBARIANS 

The decisions of Augustus and Tiberius not to attempt the conquest of Ger- 
many were among the pivotal events of European history. Had Germany been 
conquered and Romanized like Gaul, nearly all Europe west of Russia would 
have had one organization, one government, one classic culture, perhaps one 
tongue; and central Europe might have served as a buffer against those eastern 
hordes whose pressure upon the Germans caused the Germanic invasions of Italy. 

We call them Germans, but they themselves have never used this name, and 
no one knows when it came.* They were in classic days a medley of independent 
tribes occupying Europe between the Rhine and the Vistula, between the Danube 
and the North and Baltic Seas. Gradually, in the two centuries from Augustus 
to Aurelius, they passed from migratory hunting and herding to agriculture and 
village life; but they were still so far nomadic that they rapidly exhausted the land 
they tilled and then moved on to conquer new acres by the sword. If we may 
believe Tacitus, war was the German’s meat and drink: 

To cultivate the earth, and wait the regular produce of the seasons, 
is not the maxim of a German; you will more readily persuade him 
to attack the enemy and provoke honorable wounds on the field of 
battle. To earn by the sweat of your brow what you might gain at 
the price of your blood is in the opinion of a German a sluggish prin- 
ciple, unworthy of a soldier.®® 

The Roman historian, lamenting the deterioration of his own people under 
luxury and peace, described with the exaggeration of a moralist the martial quali- 
ties of the Germans, and the ardor with M'hich the women spurred them into 
battle, often fighting by their side. Flight from the enemy meant lifelong disgrace, 
in many cases suicide. Strabo described the Germans as “wilder and taller than 
the Gauls,” and Seneca, as if he had read Tacitus, drew ominous conclusions: 
“To those vigorous bodies, to those souls unwitting of pleasures, luxury, and 
wealth, add but a little more tactical skill and discipline— I say no more; you 
[Romans] will only be able to hold your own against them by returning to" the 
virtues of your sires.” 

In peace, Tacitus reports, these warriors were correspondingly indolent. The 
men spent their time (presumably after hunting or harvesting) in eating heavy 
meals of meat and drinking rivers of beer, while the women and children did the 
work of the home.®® The German bought his wife from her father by a gift of 
cattle or weapons; he had the power of life and death over her and their children, 
subject to the approval of the tribal assembly; nevertheless, women were held in 

* Rome used the adjectiv'e gemianus (from germen, offspring) to mean bom of the same 
parents; and in applying it to the Germans they may have had in mind the kinship organiza- 
tion of the Teutonic tribes. 



CIVILIZING THE WEST 


479 


CHAP. XXIl) 

high honor, were often asked to decide tribal disputes, and were as free to divorce 
their husbands as these were to divorce them.®'^ Some chieftains had several wives, 
but the usual German family was monogamous and maintained (we are assured) 
a lofty level of marital morality. Adultery was “seldom heard of” and was pun- 
ished in the woman by cutting off her hair and driving her naked through the 
streets to be flogged as she fled. The wife was allowed to practice abortion if she 
wished,®® but normally she bore many children. A man without children was so 
rare that wills were not made; it was assumed that the property of the family 
would go down from father to son, generation after generation.®® 

Four classes composed the population: (i) bondsmen, some of them slaves, 
most of them serfs bound to the soil and obliged to pay the landowner in prod- 
uce; (2) freedmen— unfranchised renters; (3) freemen— landowners and warriors; 
and (4) nobles— landowners who traced their pedigrees to the gods, but based 
their power upon substantial patrimonies and armed bodyguards {covntes, com- 
panions, “counts”). The tribal assembly \ias composed of nobles, guards, and 
freemen; they came in arms, chose the chief or king, approved the proposals sub- 
mitted to them by clashing their spears, or rejected them by a majority of grunts. 
The second and third classes were partly engaged in handicrafts and the metal- 
lurgical industries, in which the Germans excelled; the fourth provided the lords 
and knights and chivalry of feudal Germany. 

Very little cultural superstructure was added to this simple social organiza- 
tion. Religion had at this time barely emerged from nature worship into the cult 
of anthropomorphic deities. Tacitus calls them Mars, Mercury, and Hercules— 
probably Tiu (Tyr), Wodin (Odin), and Donar (Tor); we sdll unwittingly 
commemorate them, and Freya, the goddess of love, on four days of every week. 
There was a virgin goddess Hertha (Mother Earth), impregnated by a sky-god; 
and every imagination and need was supplied by a varied population of fairies, 
elves, cobolds, nixes, giants, and dwarfs. Human sacrifice was offered to Wodin, 
perhaps tastier animals to other gods. Worship Avas conducted in the open air in 
forests and groves, for the Germans thought it absurd to confine a nature spirit in 
an abode built by human hands. There was no powerful sacerdotal class like the 
Druids of Gaul or Britain, but there were priests and priestesses who presided 
over religious ceremonies, sat as judges in criminal cases, and divined the future 
by studying the motions and neighings of white horses. As in Gaul, there were 
bards who sang in rude verse the legends and history of their tribes. A small 
minority could read and write, and adapted the Greek alphabet to form the runes 
from which the Gothic letters of modem Germany evolved. Art was primitive, 
but skillful work Avas done in gold. 

When Rome withdrew her legions from Germany she retained control of the 
Rhine from source to mouths and divided the majestic A'^alley into tAvo provinces— 
Upper and Lower Germany. The latter included Holland and the Rhineland 
south to Cologne. This once lovely city, knoAvn to the Romans as Colonia Agrip- 
pinensis, had been made a colony (a.d. 50) in honor of Nero’s mother, Avho had 
been bom there; half a century later it Avas the most opulent settlement on the 



480 CAESAR AND CHRIST (CHAP. XXII 

Rhine. The province of Upper Germany followed the Rhine southward through 
Moguntiacum (Mayence), Aquae Aureliae (Baden-Baden), Argentoratum 
(Strasbourg), and Augusta Rauricorum (Augst) to Vindonissa (Windisch). 
Nearly all these towns had the usual array of temples, basilicas, theaters, baths, 
and public statuary. Many of the legionaries sent by Rome to guard the Rhine 
lived outside their camps, married German girls, and remained as citizens when 
their term of service was complete. The Rhineland was probably as thickly 
settled and affluent in Roman days as at any time before the nineteenth century. 

Between the Rhine and the Danube, as we have seen, Rome’s military engineers 
built a fortified road (Ihnes), with a fortress every nine miles, and 300 miles of 
wall. It served Rome for a century, but availed little when the Roman birth rate 
fell too far below the German. Still weaker as a frontier was the Danube, which 
the ancients considered the longest river in the world. South of it lay the half- 
barbarous provinces of Raetia, Noricum, and Pannonia, approximately compos- 
ing what our youth knew as Austria-Hungary and Serbia. On the site of modem 
Augsburg (i.e., Augustus’ town) the Romans established a colony, Augusta 
Vindelicorum, as a main station on the road from Italy over the Brenner Pass 
to the Danube. On the river they built two fortress cities— at Vindobona, now 
Vienna, and at Aquincum on the heights from which Buda looks down upon 
Pesth. In southeastern Pannonia, on the Save River west of the modem Belgrade, 
the city of Sirmium (Mitrovica) rose to be in Diocletian’s time one of the four 
imperial capitals. South of Pannonia, in the province of Dalmatia, the commercial 
energy of Greeks, Romans, and natives had developed the Adriatic ports of Salona 
(Spalato), Apollonia (near Valona), and Dyrrhachium (Durazzo). From these 
provinces below the Danube came imperial Rome’s sturdiest soldiers and, in the 
third century, the martial emperors who would for 200 years hold back the bar- 
barian avalanche. East of Pannonia lay Dacia (Rumania), with its now vanished 
capital of Sarmizegetusa. South and east of this Moesia (parts of Yugoslavia, Ru- 
mania, and Bulgaria) boasted two cities on the Danube— Singidunum (Belgrade) 
and Troesmis (Iglitza); one near the Isker— Sardica (Sofia); and three major 
towns on the Black Sea— Istrus, Tomi (Constanta), and Odessus (Varna) In 
these harassed settlements Greek civilization and Roman arms struggled in vain 
to maintain themselves against the Goths, Sarmatians, Huns, and other barbarian 
tribes breeding and wandering north of the great stream. 

It was Rome’s inability to civilize these provinces south of the Danube 
that led to her fall. The task was too great for a people suffering from old 
age; the vitahty of the master race was ebbing in sterile comfort while the 
tribes of the north were advancing in reckless health. When Trajan sub- 
sidized the Sarmatians to keep the peace it was the beginnino- of the end- 
when Marcus Aurelius brought thousands of Germans into tL Empire as 
settlers, the dikes were down. German soldiers were welcomed into the 
Roman army and rose to positions of command; German families multiplied 







Fig. -^i—Povt du Gard at Nimes 





CIVILIZING THE WEST 


CHAP. XXII) 


481 


in Italy while Italian families died. In this process the movement of Roman- 
ization was reversed: the barbarians were barbarizing Rome. 

Nevertheless, it was a magnificent and precious achievement that the West, 
if not the North, had been won for the classical heritage. There, at least, the 
arts of peace had emerged from the travail of war, and men could turn their 
swords into plowshares without decaying in urban ease and slums. Out of 
the earthy vigor of Spain and Gaul a new civilization would rise when the 
barbarian flood would fall; and the seed of despot centuries would come to 
fruit and pardon in the lands where the merciless legions had brought the law 
of Rome and the enkindling light of Greece. 



CHAPTER XXIII 


Roman Greece 


I. PLUTARCH 

R ome tried hard to be generous to Greece and did not quite fail. No 
.garrisons were placed in the new province of Achaea; less was exacted 
from it than its own taxgatherers had claimed before; the city-states were 
allowed to govern themselves by their old constitutions and laws; and many 
of them— Athens, Sparta, Plataea, Delphi, and others— were “free cities” 
exempt from all restrictions except the right to wage foreign or class war. 

Nevertheless, hungry for its ancient liberties, and bled by Roman generals, 
moneylenders, and businessmen skilled in buying cheap and selling dear, 
Greece joined in Mithridates’ revolt and paid the heaviest penalty. Athens 
suffered a devastating siege, and Delphi, Elis, and Epidaurus were pillaged 
of their sancmary hoards. A generation later Caesar and Pompey, then An- 
tony and Brutus, fought their duels on Greek territory, conscripted Greek 
men, requisitioned Greek crops and gold, levied twenty years’ taxes in two, 
and left the cities destitute. Under Augustus Greek Asia recovered, but 
Greece herself remained poor, ruined not so much by the Roman conquest 
as by a stifling despotism in Sparta, a chaotic freedom in Athens, a blighting 
sterility in soil and men. Her most enterprising sons deserted her for younger 
and richer lands. The rise of new powers in Eg\-pt, Carthasre, and Rome, and 
the development of industry in the Hellenistic East, left the homeland of the 
classic spirit outmoded and forlorn. Rome loaded Greece with compliments 
and ravaged her art; Scaurus took 3000 statues for his theater, Calio-ula or- 
dered the husband of his mistress to comb Greece for statuary, and Nero 
alone took half the sculptures of Delphi. Not till Hadrian would Athens 
smile again. 

Epirus bore the brunt of Rome’s anger in the Macedonian Wars; the Senate 
delivered it to the rapine of the soldiers, and 1 50,000 Epirots were sold as slaves. 
Augustus built a new capital for Epirus at Nicopolis to celebrate his triumph at 
near-by Actium; civilization must have had some homage there, since the Citv of 
Victory gave Epictetus an audience and a home. Macedonia fared better than its 
loyal neighbor; it was rich in minerals and timber, and its commercial life was 
quickened by the Via Egnatia that spanned it and Thrace from Apollonia and 
Dyrrhachium to Byzantium. On this great highway, still in part preserved, lay the 

482 



ROMAN GREECE 


CHAP. XXIIl) 


483 


chief cities of the province— Edessa, Pella, and Thessalonica. This last— known 
to us as Salonika, but to modern Greeks by its ancient name (Victory of Thes- 
saly)— was the capital of the province, seat of the provincial council, and one of 
the great ports of trade between the Balkans and Asia. Thrace, farther east, de- 
voted itself to agriculture, herding, and mining; but it had considerable cities at 
Serdica (Sofia), Philippopolis its capital, Adrianople, Perinthus, and Byzantium 
(Istanbul). Here at the Golden Horn the merchants and fishmongers grew rich 
while the Greek settlers of the hinterland gave way to the encroaching bar- 
barians; all the grain of the interior came down to its docks; all the commerce 
of Scythia and the Black Sea paid toll as it passed by, and the fish almost leaped 
into the net as they poured through the narrow Bosporus. Soon Constantine 
would recognize this site as the key city of the classic world. 

Thessaly, south of Macedonia, specialized in wheat and fine horses. Euboea, 
the great island named of old (like Boeotia) for its fine cattle, was described by 
Dio Chrysostom ^ as reverting to barbarism in our second century; here, above 
all, the discouragement of the poor by the concentration of land and wealth in 
the hands of a few families, the discouragement of the rich by ever-rising taxes 
and liturgies, and the discouragement of parentage by selfish wealth and desperate 
poverty had almost wiped out a once thriving agricultural population, and cattle 
grazed within the walls of Chalcis and Eretria. Boeotia had not recovered from 
the death and taxes laid upon it by Sulla’s campaigns; “Thebes,” said Strabo, “is 
only a village,” huddled into what had once been merely its Cadmea or citadel. 
A century of peace, however, brought some prosperity to Plataea; and Chaeronea, 
on whose plains Philip and Sulla had won empires, retained enough charm to 
keep its most famous citizen; it had become so small, said Plutarch, that he would 
not make it smaller by leaving it.^ In his calm career and genial thought we find 
a fairer side of a somber scene, a decent middle class clinging to ancient virtues, 
capable of civic devotion, warm friendship, and parental love. There is no more 
pleasant character in our tale than Plutarch of Chaeronea. 


He was bom there about a.d. 46, and died there about 126. He was a 
student at Athens when Nero collected triumphs in Greece. He must have 
had a fair income, for he traveled in Eg)"pt and Asia Minor and uvice in 
Italy; he lectured in Greek at Rome and seems to have served his country 
in some diplomatic role. He liked the great capital and the good manners and 
honorable life of its new aristocracy; he admired their stoic code, and agreed 
with Ennius that Rome had been made by morality and character. As he 
contemplated these living nobles and the noble dead, the thought came to 
him of comparing the heroes of Rome with those of Greece. He proposed 
not merely to write history or even biography, but to teach virtue and hero- 
ism by historic exemplars; even his Parallel Lives were in his mind Aloralia. 
He was always a teacher and never lost a chance to tie a moral to a tale; bur 
who has ever done it more gracefully? He warns us, in his “Alexander,” that 



CAESAR AND CHRIST 


484 


(chap, xxm 


he is more interested in character than in history; he hopes that by pairing 
and comparing great Romans with great Greeks he will pass on some moral 
stimulus, some heroic impulse, to his readers. With disarming candor he 
confesses that he himself has become a better man through keeping company 
so long with distinguished men.® 

We must not expect to find in him the conscience and accuracy of a proper 
historian; he is rich in errors of name and place and date and occasionally (if 
we may judge) misunderstands events; he even fails in two major tasks of the 
biographer— to show the derivation of his subject’s character and work from 
heredity, environment, and circumstance, and the development of character 
through growth, responsibility, and crisis; in Plutarch, as in Heracleitus, a 
man’s character is his fate. But no one who has read the Lives can feel their 
shortcomings; these are lost in the vivid narrative, the exciting episodes, the 
fascinating anecdotes, the wise comments, the noble style. In all these 1 500 
pages there is not a line of padding; every sentence counts. A hundred 
eminent men— generals, poets, and philosophers— have borne witness to the 
book; “it is,” said Mme Roland, “the pasture of great souls.” * “I can hardly 
do without Plutarch,” wrote Montaigne; “it is my breviary.” ® Shakespeare 
takes many stories here, and his view of Brutus goes back through Plutarch 
to Roman aristocrats. Napoleon carried the Lives with him almost every- 
where; and Heine, reading them, could hardly restrain himself from leaping 
upon a horse and riding forth to conquer France. Greece has not left us a 
more precious book. 

Having seen the Mediterranean world Plutarch returned to Chaeronea, 
raised four sons and a daughter, lectured and wrote, journeyed now and then 
to Athens, but for the most part shared to the end of his days the simple life 
of his native town. He thought it an obligation to combine public office with 
his scholarly pursuits. His fellow citizens elected him building inspector, then 
chief magistrate, then Boeotarch— member of the national council. He pre- 
sided over municipal ceremonies and festivals, and became in his spare mo- 
ments a priest of the revived oracle at Delphi. He thought it unwise to reject 
the old faith because of its intellectual incredibility; the vital thing was not 
the creed but the support it gave to man’s weak morality, the reinforcing 
bond it wove among the members and generations of a family and a state. 
The thrill of religious emotion was in his judgment the most deepening ex- 
perience of life. Tolerant as well as pious, he almost founded the study of 
comparative religion by his treatises on Roman and Egyptian cults.® All 
deities, he argued, are aspects of one supreme being, timeless, indescribable, 
so far removed from earthly and temporal affairs that intermediary spirits 
(daimones) must create and regulate the world. There are also evil spirits, 
marshaled by some master demon who is the source and soul of all the cha/as. 



ROMAN GREECE 


CHAP, XXIIl) 


485 


irrationality, and viciousness in nattu*e and man. It is good, Plutarch thought, 
to believe in personal immortality— a rewarding Heaven, a cleansing Purga- 
tory, a punishing Hell; he was comforted by the possibility that a stay in 
Purgatory might purify even Nero, and that only a few would suffer eternal 
damnation.'^ He denounced the terrors of superstition as worse than atheism, 
but he accepted divination, oracles, necromancy, and the prophetic power of 
dreams. He did not pretend to be an original philosopher; like Apuleius and 
so many others of that age, he described himself as an adapter of Plato. He 
condemned the Epicureans for replacing the fear of Hell with the gloom of 
annihilation, and criticized the “repugnances” of Stoicism; but he held, like 
a Stoic, that “to follow God and to obey reason are the same thing.” * 

His lectures and essays have properly been collected under the title 
Moralia, for most of them are simple and genial preachments on the wisdom 
of life. They discuss everything, from the advisability of keeping old men in 
public office to the priority of the chicken or the egg. Plutarch is fond of his 
library, but confesses that good health is more precious than good books: 

Some men, led by gluttony, rush off to join in drinking bouts, as 
if they were laying in provisions for a siege. . . . The less expensive 
foods are always more helpful. . . . When, in a precipitate retreat, 
Artaxerxes Memnon had nothing to eat but barley-bread and figs, he 
exclaimed, “What a pleasure is this, which has never been mine be- 
fore!” , . . Wine is the most beneficial of beverages, provided there 
is a happy combination of it with the occasion as well as with water. 

. . . Especially to be feared are indigestions arising from meats, for 
they are depressing at the outset, and a pernicious residue from them 
remains behind. It is best to accustom the body not to require meat 
in addition to other food. For the earth yields in abundance many 
things not only for nourishment but for comfort and enjoyment. But 
since custom has become a sort of unnatural second nature, our use 
of meat should be ... as a prop and support of our diet; we should 
use other foods . . . more in accord with nature, and less dulling to 
the reasoning faculty, which, as it were, is kindled from plain and 
light substances.® 

He follows Plato in advocating equal opportunity for women, and gives 
many examples of cultured ladies in antiquity (there were some in his own 
circle) ; but he views adultery by the man xvith all the lenience of a pagan 
male: 

If a man in private life, who is incontinent and dissolute in regard 
to his pleasures, commit some peccadillo with a paramour or maid- 
servant, his wedded wife ought not to be indignant or angry, but 
she should reason that it is respect for her that leads him to share his 
licentiousness with another woman.^® 



CAESAR AND CHRIST 


486 


(chap, xxin 


Nevertheless, we rise from these charming essays warmed by the fellow- 
ship of a man humane, essentially wholesome, and complete. We are not 
offended by the commonness of his ideas; his moderation is a welcome anti- 
dote to the ideological hysteria of our time,' his good sense, his kindly humor, 
and his engaging illustrations carry us on unresisting, even over the shoals of 
his platitudes. It is refreshing to find a philosopher who is wise enough to be 
happy. Let us be thankful, he counsels us, for the common boons and graces 
of fife, and feel them none the less gladly for their permanence: 


We must not forget those blessings and comforts which we share 
with many more, but must . . . joy in this, that we live, that we have 
our health, that we behold the light of the sun. . . . Will not the 
good man consider every day a festival? ... For the world is the 
most august of temples, and most worthy of its Lord. Into this temple 
man is introduced at his birth, into the presence not of statues made 
with hands and motionless, but such as tlie Divine Mind has mani- 
fested to our senses . . . even the sun, moon, and stars, and the 
rivers ever pouring forth fresh water, and the earth producing 
food. ... As this life is the most perfect of initiations into the 
most exalted of mysteries, we should ever be filled with good cheer 
and rejoicing.^^ 


II. INDIAN SU.MMER 

Plutarch exemplifies two movements cf his time; the return to religion 
and the passing renaissance of Greek literature and philosophy. The former 
was universal, the latter was confined to Athens and the Greek East. Six cities 
of the Peloponnesus prospered, but contributed little to Greek thought. 
Western commerce and a busy textile industry kept Patrae alive through 
Roman and medieval history even to our day. Olympia throve on the leavings 
of tourists coming to see Pheidias’ Zeus or the Olympic games. It is one of the 
pleasantest aspects of Greek history that these quadrennial contests continued 
from 776 B.c. to A.D. 394, when Theodosius ended them. As in the days of 
Prodicus and Herodotus, philosophers and historians came to harangue the 
crowd assembling for the festival. Dio Chrysostom describes authors reading 
“their stupid compositions” to transient listeners, poets reciting their verses, 
rhetoricians thumping the air, and “sophists in great number, like gorgeous 
peacocks,” coming to blow their wind over the multitude;^- he proved no 
more silent than the rest. Epictetus pictures the spectators cramped and 
sweltering in the unshaded stands, burned by the sun or drenched by the 
rain, but forgetting everything in the tumult and the shouting that marked 
the final moments of each bout or race.^® The old Nemean, Ist hmian^ Pyth- 



ROMAN GREECE 


CHAP. XXIIl) 


487 


ian, and Panathenaic games continued; new ones were added like the Pan- 
hellenia of Hadrian; and many of them included competitions in poetry, 
oratory, or music. “Can you not hear classical music at the great festivals?” 
asks a character in Lucian.^^ Gladiatorial combats were introduced to 
Greece by the Roman colony at Corinth; thence they spread to other cities 
until even the Theater of Dionysus was befouled with butchery. Many 
Greeks— Dio Chrysostom, Lucian, Plutarch— protested against the desecra- 
tion; Demonax, the Cynic philosopher, begged the Athenians not to allow 
the innovation until they had thrown down the altar of Pity at Athens;^® 
but the Roman games continued in Greece till predominantly Christian 
times. 

Sparta and Argos were still moderately alive, and Epidaurus grew rich on 
the visits of sick bodies and souls to the shrine of Asclepius. Corinth, control- 
ling the trade across the isthmus, became, within half a century of it;s re- 
estabhshment by Caesar, the wealthiest city in Greece. Its heterogeneous 
population of Romans, Greeks, Syrians, Jews, and Egyptians, most of them 
uprooted from their native lands and morals, was notorious for commercial- 
ism, epicureanism, and immorality. The old Temple of Aphrodite Pandemos 
carried on an undkninished trade as the shrine and center of Corinthian pros- 
titutes. Apuleius describes a gorgeous ballet that he saw in Corinth, represent- 
ing the judgment of Paris. “Venus appeared all naked, save that her fine and 
comely middle was hghtly covered with a thin silken smock; and this the 
wanton wind blew hither and thither.” Corinth had not mended her ways 
since Aspasia. 

Passing through Megara into Attica, the rural scene was one of great 
poverty. Deforestation, erosion, and mineral depletion had been added to 
war, emigration, taxation, and race suicide to make a desert of the Roman 
peace. Two cities alone in Attica were prosperous: Eleusis, whose sacra- 
mental Mysteries drew lucrative crowds to her every year; and Athens, the 
educational and intellectual center of the classic world. Its ancient institu- 
tions— council, assembly, and archons— still functioned, and Rome had re- 
stored the Areopagus to its primeval authority as the seat of judgment and 
the citadel of property rights. Rulers like Antiochus IV, Herod the Great, 
Augustus, and Hadrian rivaled millionaires like Herodes Atticus in benefac- 
tions to the city. Herodes rebuilt the stadium in marble, almost exhausting 
Pentelicus, and raised an odeon, or music hall, at the foot of’the Acropohs. 
Hadrian provided funds to complete the Olympieum, and Zeus, who now 
had one foot in the grave, received a home worthy of his Casanova prime. 

Meanwhile the unrivaled fame of Athens in letters, philosophy, and educa- 
tion brought a stream of rich youths and needy scholars to her schools. The 
University of Athens consisted of ten professorships endowed by the city or 



488 CAESAR AND CHRIST (cHAP. XXIII 

the emperor, and a host of private lecturers and tutors. Instruction was given 
in literature, philology, rhetoric, philosophy, mathematics, astronomy, medi- 
cine, and law— usually in gymnasia or theaters, sometimes in temples or 
homes. Except in oratory or law the curriculum had no thought of equipping 
the student to earn a Hving; it sought rather to sharpen his mind, deepen his 
understanding, and provide him with a moral code. It produced many bril- 
liant intellects, but also it generated thousands of cobweb-spinners who 
would turn both philosophy and rehgion into a maze of controversial 
theories. 

As Athens depended for a considerable part of its income on the students, 
it put up patiently with their hilarious ways. “Freshmen” were hazed with 
practical jokes that sometimes injured citizens; the students of rival profes- 
sors became ardent partisans and attacked one another in occasional riots like 
the “cane rushes” of our youth. Some students felt that they could learn more 
from the courtesans and gamblers of the town than from all teachers of 
philosophy; and we gather from Alciphron that the ladies in question looked 
upon the professors as dull and incompetent competitors.^’^ But there was 
often a pleasant bond of friendship between learners and teachers; many of 
these invited students to dinner, guided their reading, visited them in illness, 
and kept their parents misinformed about their progress. Most of the lec- 
turers lived on fees paid by each disciple; a small number of professors drew 
a salary from the state; and the heads of the four schools of philosophy re- 
ceived 10,000 drachmas ($6000) a year from the imperial Treasury. 

Under these stimuli the period of the “Second Sophistic” developed— a 
revival of the orator-philosopher passing from city to city as honorariums 
might beckon, delivering addresses, teaching pupils, pleading cases in the 
comts, living in rich homes as spiritual counselors, and sometimes acting as 
honored emissaries of their city-states. The movement flourished throughout 
the Empire, but especially in the Greek world, in the first three centuries 
of our era; philosophers were then, says Dio, as numerous as cobblers.^* The 
new sophists, hke the old, had no common doctrine, phrased their teaching 
eloquently, drew large audiences, and attained in many cases high social 
status, imperial favor, or great wealth. They differed from the earlier Soph- 
ists in seldom questioning religion or morality; they were more interested in 
form and style, m oratorical technique and skill, than in the great questions 
that had shaken the beliefs and morals of the world; indeed, the new sophists 
were warm defenders of the ancient faith. Philostratus has preserved for us 
the lives of the leading sophists of this age; let one example suffice. Adrian of 
Tyre studied rhetoric at Athens and rose to the state chair of rhetoric there; 
he opened his inaugural address with the proud words, “Once again letters 
have come from Phoenicia.” He rode to his lectures in a carriage, with silver 



ROMAN GREECE 


CHAP. XXIIl) 


489 

I 


harness, in rich attire, and gleaming with gems. When Marcus Aurelius 
vnsited Athens he tested Adrian by asking him to improvise an oration on a 
difficult theme; Adrian carried the matter off so well that Marcus loaded 
him with honors, silver and gold, houses and slaves. Promoted to the chair 
of rhetoric at Rome, Adrian’s lectures, though in Greek, proved so alluring 
that senators adjourned their sessions, and the populace deserted the panto- 
mimes, to go and hear him.^® Such a career almost announces the death of 
philosophy; it had been swallowed up in an ocean of rhetoric, and had ceased 
to think when it learned to speak. 

At the other extreme were the Cynics. We have described them else- 
where— their tattered cloak, their unkempt hair and beard, their wallet and 
staff, their reduction of life to simplicities, sometimes obscenities. They lived 
like mendicant friars, had a hierarchical organization with novices and su- 
periors,^ avoided marriage and work, scorned the conventions and arti- 
ficialities of civilization, denounced aU governments as thieves and super- 
fluities, laughed at all oracles, “mysteries,” and gods. Everyone satirized 
them, Lucian most savagely; yet even Lucian admired Demonax, a cultured 
Cynic who had abandoned his wealth to live in philosophical poverty. He 
gave his century of life ( a . d . 50-150) to helping others, reconciling hostile 
individuals and cities; and Athens, which ridiculed everything, respected 
him. Indicted before an Athenian court for refusing to offer sacrifice to the 
gods, he won acquittal by saying simply that the gods had no need of offer- 
ings, and that religion consisted in kindness to all. When the Athenian as- 
sembly was engaged in a quarrel of factions, his mere appearance sufficed 
to quiet the dispute; whereupon he left without having uttered a word. It 
was his custom, in old age, to enter any house uninvited and eat and sleep 
there; and every home in Athens sought the honor.^^ Lucian speaks with less 
sympathy of Peregrinus, who tried Christianity, abandoned it for the Cynic 
regimen, denounced Rome, called all Greece to revolt, and astonished an 
assemblage at Olympia by making and lighting his own funeral pyre, leap- 
ing into it, and allowing himself to be consumed in the flames ( a . d . 165).^^ 
In such scorn of wealth and hfe the Cynics were paving a way for the monks 
of the Christian Church. 

When Vespasian, Hadrian, and Marcus Aurelius established chairs of 
philosophy at Athens they ignored the Cynics and the Skeptics, and recog- 
nized only four schools of thought: the Platonic Academy, the Aristotehan 
Lyceum, the Stoics, and the Epicureans. The Academy had diluted Plato’s 
proud faith in reason into the universal doubt of Cameades; but after the 
latter’s death the school reacted toward orthodoxy, and Antiochus of As- 
calon, who taught Cicero at the Academy (79 b.c.), returned to Plato’s con- 
ceptions of reason, immortality, and God. The Lyceum was now devoting 



490 


CAESAR AND CHRIST 


(chap, xxm 

itself to natural science in the tradition of Theophrastus, or to pious com- 
mentaries on Aristotle’s works. The school of Epicurus was declining in this 
religious age; few men dared profess its doctrines without diplomatic reserva- 
tions. In most of Greek Asia the words Epicurean, atheist, and Christian were 
synonyms expressive of horror and desecration."® 

The dominant philosophy had long since been Stoicism. The rigorous 
perfectionism of its early forms had been softened by Panaetius and Posei- 
donius, both citizens of Rhodes. Returning to Athens after Scipio’s death 
(129 B.C.), Panaetius, now head of the Stoa, defined God as a material spirit 
or breath {ptieuma) permeating all things, appearing in plants as the power 
of growth, in animals as soul (psyche), in man as reason (logos). His suc- 
cessors developed this vague pantheism into a more definitely religious phi- 
losophy. The Stoic theory of moral discipline moved closer to Cynic as- 
ceticism; and in the second century a.d. Cynicism, as one observer put it, 
differed from Stoicism only by a torn cloak. In Epictetus, as in Marcus 
Aurelius, we see both movements advancing toward Christianity. 

III. EPICTETUS 

Epictetus was bom at Hierapolis in Phrygia about a.d. 50, a slave woman’s 
son, and therefore himself a slave. He had little chance of education, for he 
was passed from one owner and city to another, until he found himself the 
property of Epaphroditus, a powerful freedman in Nero’s court. He was of 
feeble health and lame, apparently through the brutality of one of his mas- 
ters, but he lived the normal threescore years and ten. Epaphroditus allowed 
him to attend the lectures of Musonius Rufus and later freed him. Epictetus 
must himself have set up as a teacher in Rome, for when Domitian banished 
the philosophers Epictetus was among those who fled. He settled in Nicop- 
olis and drew to his lectures there students from many parts. One was Arrian 
of Nicomedia, later governor o-f Cappadocia; Arrian took down the words of 
Epictetus, probably in shorthand, and published them as “rab- 

bings” or copies— now on all fists of the world’s best books as the Discourses.* 
It is no dull formal treatise, but a classic of simple speech and bluff humor, 
intimately expressing a modest and kindly, yet sharp and vigorous character. 
Epictetus applied his lusty sarcasms to himself and others impartially, and 
gaily mocked his rough-and-tumble style. He made no complaint when 
Demonax, hearing that the old bachelor counseled marriage, sarcastically 
petitioned for his daughter’s hand; he excused himself on the ground that 
teaching wisdom is as great a ser\fice as begetting “two or three pug-nosed 


• Arrian later issued an Encheiridion, or synoptic “Handbook” of Epictetus. 



CHAP. XXIIl) ROMAN GREECE 49^ 

children.” In later years he took a wife to help him care for an infant that 
he had rescued from exposure. In those years his fame compassed the Empire, 
and Hadrian counted him among his friends. 

Epictetus, resembling Socrates in this as in so many other ways, cared too 
little about physics or metaphysics to construct a system of thought; his one 
subject and passion was the good hfe. “What do I care,” he asks, “whether all 
existing things are composed of atoms ... or of fire and earth.^ Is it not 
enough to learn the true nature of good and evil.^” Philosophy does not 
mean reading books about wisdom, it means training oneself in the practice 
of wisdom. The essence of the matter is that a man should so mold his life 
and conduct that his happiness shall depend as little as possible upon external 
things. This does not require a hermit’s solitude; on the contrary, “Epicure- 
ans and blackguards” are to be condemned for detaching men from public 
service; the good man will take his part in civic affairs. But he will accept 
with equanimity all vicissitudes of fortune— poverty, bereavement, humilia- 
tion, pain, slavery, imprisonment, or death; he will know how to “endure 
and renounce.” 

Never say about anything, “I have lost it,” but only “I have given 
it back.” Is your child dead? It has been given back. Is your wife dead? 

She has been returned. “I have had my farm taken away.” Very well; 
this, too, has been given back. So long as God gives it to you take 
care of it as something not your own. . . . “Alas, that I should be 
lame in one leg!” Slave! do you then, because of one paltry leg, 
blame the universe? Will you not make a free gift of it to the whole? 

... I must go into exile: does anyone keep me from going with a 
smile, serene? ... “I will throw you into prison.” It is only my 
body you imprison. I must die; must I then die complaining? . . . 
These are the lessons that philosophy ought to rehearse, and write 
down daily, and practice. ... A platform or a prison are places, one 
high, the other low; but your moral purpose can be kept the same in 
either place.®^ 

The slave can be spiritually free, like Diogenes; the prisoner can be free, like 
Socrates; the emperor can be a slave, like Nero."® Even death is a minor 
incident in the good man’s life; he may advance its coming if he finds that evil 
too heavily outweighs good;^ in any case he will receive it calmly as part of 
the secret wisdom of Nature. 

If heads of grain had feeling, ought they to pray that they should 
never be harvested? ... I would have you know that it is a curse 
never to die. . . . The ship goes down. What, then, am I to do? 
Whatever I can ... I drown without fear, neither shrinking nor 
crying out against God, but recognizing that what is bom must also 



492 


CAESAR AND CHRIST 


(chap, xxin 

perish. For I am a part of the whole, as an hour is part of a day. I 
must come on as the hour, and hke an hour pass away.®® . . . Re- 
gard yourself as but a single thread of all that go to make up the 
garment.®^ . . . Seek not that the things which happen to you should 
happen as you wish, but wish the things that happen to be as they 
are, and you will find tranquillity .®- 

Though he often speaks of Nature as an impersonal force, Epictetus as 
frequently infuses his conception with personality, intelligence, and love. 
The atmosphere of religion pervading his age warms his philosophy to a self- 
surrendering piety akin to that of the Stoic emperor who would soon read 
him and echo his thought. He speaks with a fine eloquence of the majestic 
order prevailing in time and space, and the evidences of design in nature, but 
he proceeds to explain that “God has created some animals to be eaten, others 
to serve in farming, others to produce cheese.” ®® The human mind itself, he 
thinks, is so marvelous an instrument that only a divine creator could have 
brought it into being; indeed, so far as we possess reason we are parts of the 
World Reason. If we could trace our ancestry back to the first man we 
should find him begotten by God; God is therefore literally the father of us 
all, and all men are brothers.^* 

He who has once observed with understanding the administration 
of the world, and has learned that the greatest and most comprehen- 
sive community is the system \_systema, standing together] of men 
and God, and that from God came the seeds whence all things, and 
especially rational beings, spring— why should not that man call him- 
self a citizen of the world . . . nay, a son of God.^ ... If a man 
could only subscribe heart and soul to this doctrine ... I think he 
would entertain no mean or ignoble thought in himself. . . . Bear 
in mind, then, when you eat, who you are that eat, and whom you 
are nourishing; when you cohabit with women, who you are that 
do this. . . . You are bearing God about with you, you poor wretch, 
and know it not! 

In a passage that Saint Paul might have written, Epictetus exhorts his 
students not only to submit their wills trustingly to God’s, but to be 
the apostles of God among mankind; 

God says, “Go and bear witness for me.” ®® . . . Think what it is 
to be able to say, “God has sent me into the world to be his soldier 
and witness, to tell men that their sorrows and fears are vain, that 
to a good man no evil can befall, whether he live or die. God sends 
me at one time here, at another time there; he disciplines me by 
poverty and imprisonment, that I may be the better wimess to him 
among men. With such a ministry committed to me, can I any longer 



ROMAN GREECE 


493 


CHAP. XXIIl) 

care in what place I am, or who my companions are, or what they say 
about me? Nay, rather, does not my whole nature strain after God, 
his laws and commandments?” 

As for himself, he is filled with awe and gratitude by the mystery and 
splendor of things, and he intones to the Creator a pagan Magnificat that is 
one of the supreme passages in the history of religion: 

What language is adequate to praise all the works of Providence? 

... If we had sense, ought we to be doing anything else, publicly 
or privately, than hymning and praising the Deity, and rehearsing 
his benefits? Ought we not, as we dig and plow and eat, to sing a 
hymn of praise to God? . . . What then?— since most of you have 
become blind, ought there not to be someone to fulfill this office for 
you, and in behalf of all sing hymns of praise to God? 

Though we have here no word for immortality, and can trace all these 
ideas back to the Stoics and the Cynics, we find in these pages remarkable 
parallels to many attitudes of early Christianity. Epictetus, indeed, sometimes 
advances beyond Christianity: he denounces slavery, condemns capital pun- 
ishment, and wishes to have criminals treated as sick men.®® He advocates a 
daily examination of conscience and announces a kind of Golden Rule: 
“What you shun to suffer, do not make others suffer’ and he adds: “If a 
man is reported to have spoken ill of you, make no defense, but say, “He did 
not know the rest of my faults, else he would not have mentioned only 
these.” He advises men to return good for evil,^® and to “submit when re- 
viled”;^^ to fast now and then and “abstain from the things you desire.” 
Sometimes he speaks of the body with the blasphemous contempt of an un- 
secured anchorite: “The body is of all things the most unpleasant and most 
foul. ... It is astonishing that we should love a thing to which we perform 
such strange services every day. I fill this bag, and then I empty it; what is 
more troublesome? ” There are passages that breathe the piety of Augustine 
and the eloquence of Newman: “Use me henceforward, O God, as thou 
‘ wilt; I am of one mind with thee. I am thine. I ask exemption from nothing 
that seems good in thy sight. WTiere thou wilt, lead me; in what raiment thou 
wilt, clothe me.” And hke Jesus he bids his disciples take no care of the 
morrow: 

To have God as our maker, father, and guardian— shall not this 
suffice to keep us from grief and fear? And wherewithal shall I be 
fed, asks one, if I have nothing? But what shall we say of . . . the 
animals, every one of which is sufficient to itself, and lacks neither 
its own proper food nor that way of life which is appropriate to it, 
and in harmony with nature? 



494 


CAESAR AND CHRIST 


(chap, xxin 

Is it any wonder that Christians like Saint John Chrysostom and Augustine 
lauded him, and that his Enchetridion was adopted, with min or changes, as 
a rule and guide for the monastic hfe?"*® Who knows but that Epictetus had 
read in some form the sayings of Jesus and was, without knowing it, a 
convert to Christianity? 


IV. LUCIAN AND THE SKEPTICS 

Nevertheless, in this final stage of Hellenistic culture, there were skeptics 
who recalled all the doubts of Protagoras, and a Lucian who laughed at 
belief with the insolence of Aristippus and almost Plato’s charm. The school 
of Pyrrho was not dead; Aenesidemus of Cnossus rephrased its denials in 
the Alexandria of our first century, by propounding the famous “Ten 
Modes” (tropoi), or contradictions, that made knowledge impossible.* To- 
wards the end of the second century Sextus Empiricus, of unknown date or 
place, gave the skeptical philosophy its final formulation in several destruc- 
tive volumes of which three survive. Sextus takes all the world for his enemy; 
he divides philosophers into diverse species and slays each breed in turn. 
He writes with the vigor necessary to an executioner, the good order and 
clarity characteristic of ancient philosophy, occasional sarcastic humor, and 
much dreary chopping of logic. 

To every argument, says Sextus, an equal argument can be opposed, so 
that in the end there is nothing so superfluous as reasoning. Deduction is un- 
trustworthy unless based upon complete induction; but complete induction 
is impossible, for we can never tell when a “negative instance” will turn up.®^ 
“Cause” is merely a regular antecedent (as Hume would repeat), and all 
knowledge is relative.®^ Similarly there is no objective good or evil; morality 
changes across every frontier,®® and virtue has a different definition in every 
age. All the arguments of the nineteenth century against the possibihty of 
knowing whether God exists or not are stated here, and all the contradictions 
between benevolent omnipotence and worldly suffering.®* But Sextus is a 

• Some of them; (i) The sense organs (e.g., eyes) of different animals, even of different 
men, vary in form and stnicture, and presumably give diverse pictures of the world; how do 
we know which picture is true? (2) The senses convey only a fraction of the obiect-e.g., a 
limited range of colors, sounds, and smells; clearly the conception that we form of the object 
is partial and unreliable. (3) One sense sometimes contradicts another. (4) Our physical and 
mental condition colors and perhaps discolors our perceptions-awake or sleeping ' youth or 
age, motion or rest, hunger or sanetjx hatred or love. (6) The appearance of an object varies 
according to the condmon of the surrounding media-light, air, cold, heat, moisture, etc.; 
which appearance is real ? (8) Nothing is known by itself or absolutely, but only in relation 
TO something else, ta pros u. (lo) An mdmdual’s beliefs depend upon the custoL, religion, 
insututions, and laws amid which he was reared; no individual can rhinb objectively. so 



ROMAN GREECE 


495 


CHAP. XXIIl) 

more complete agnostic than the agnostics, for he affirms that we cannot 
know that we cannot know; agnosticism is a dogma.®® But, he consoles us, we 
do not need certainty. Probability is enough for all practical purposes, and 
the suspension of judgment (epoche, holding back; aphasia, saying nothing) 
in philosophical questions, instead of disturbing the mind, brings it a careless 
peace (ataraxia) Meanwhile, since nothing is certain, let us accept the 
conventions and beliefs of our time and place, and modestly worship our 
ancient gods.®^ 

Lucian would have belonged to the Skeptic school if he had been so un- 
wise as to fetter his judgment with a label. Like Voltaire, whom he resembled 
in all but pity, he wrote philosophy so brilliantly that no one supposed that 
he was writing philosophy. As if to show the spread of Hellenism, he was 
born at Samosata, in distant Commagene; “I am a Syrian from the Euphrates,” 
he said; his native tongue was Syriac, his blood probably Semitic.®® He was 
apprenticed to a sculptor, but deserted to a rhetor. After a stay in Antioch 
practicing law he took to the road as a “dependent scholar,” living by lec- 
turing, especially in Rome and Gaul; then (a.d. 165) he settled down in 
Athens. In his later years he was rescued from poverty by the pious but 
tolerant Marcus Aurelius, who appointed the irreverent skeptic to an official 
post in Egypt. There, at a date unknown, he died. 

Time has preserved seventy-six of Lucian’s little books, and many of them 
are as fresh and pertinent today as when he read them to friends and audi- 
ences eighteen centuries ago. He tried his hand at a variety of forms, until 
he found a congenial medium in the dialogue. His Dialogues of the Hetairai 
were free enough to win a large audience. But at least in his works he is 
more absorbed in the gods than in courtesans; he is never through mishandling 
them. “When I was a boy,” says his Menippus, “and heard the tales of Homer 
and Hesiod about the gods— adulterous gods, rapacious gods, violent, htigious, 
incestuous gods— I found it all quite proper and, indeed, was intensely in- 
terested. When, however, I came to man’s estate I observed that the laws 
flatly contradicted the poets, forbidding adultery and rapacity.” Perplexed, 
-Menippus went to the philosophers for an explanation; but they were so 
busy refuting one another that they only confounded his confusion. So he 
made himself wings, flew up to heaven, and examined matters for himself. 
Zeus received him magnanimously and allowed him to watch Olympus 
functioning. Zeus himself was hstening to prayers as they came up to him 
through “a row of openings with lids like well covers. . . . Of those at 
sea one prayed for a north, another for a south, wind. The farmer asked for 
rain, the fuller for sun. . . . Zeus seemed puzzled; he did not Itnow which 
prayer to grant, and experienced a truly Academic suspension of judgment, 
showing a reserve and equilibrium worthy of Pyrrho himself.” ®® The great 



CAESAR AND CHRIST 


496 


(chap. XXIII 


god rejects some petitions, grants others, and then arranges the day’s weather: 
rain for Scythia, snow for Greece, a storm in the Adriatic, and “about a thou- 
sand bushels of hail for Cappadocia.” Zeus is disturbed by the new and 
outlandish gods who have stolen into his pantheon; he issues a decree that, 
whereas Olympus is crowded with polyglot aliens, who have caused a great 
rise in the price of nectar, and the old and only true gods are being squeezed 
out, a committee of seven shall be appointed to sit on claims. In “Zeus Cross- 
Examined” an Epicurean philosopher asks Zeus are the gods also subject to 
Fate? Yes, answers the genial Jove. “Why, then, should men sacrifice to 
you?” asks the philosopher; and “if Fate rules men and gods, why should we 
be held responsible for our actions?” “I see,” says Zeus, “that you have been 
with that accursed race, the sophists.” In “Zeus Tragoedus” the god is in a 
gloomy mood, for he observes a great crowd gathering in Athens to hear 
Damis the Epicurean deny, and Timocles the Stoic affirm, the existence and 
solicitude of the gods. Timocles breaks down and runs away, and Zeus de- 
spairs about his own future. Hermes comforts him: “There are plenty of 
believers left— a majority of Greeks, the body and dregs of the people, and 
the barbarians to a man.” That such a piece should have brought no indict- 
ment on Lucian’s head proves either the tolerance of the times or the twilight 
of the Greek gods. 

But Lucian was as skeptical of rhetoric and philosophy as of the old reli- 
gion. In one of his Dialogues of the Dead Charon commands a rhetorician, 
whom he is ferrying to the other world, to “strip off that boundless length of 
sentences that is wrapped around you, and those antitheses, and balanced 
clauses”-otherwise the boat will surely sink.®- In “Hermotimus” a student 
enters with enthusiasm upon the study of philosophy, hoping that it will 
give him some substitute for faith; but he is shocked by the vanity and greed 
of the rival teachers, and is left intellectually and morally naked by their 
mutual refutations; henceforth, he concludes, “I shall turn aside from a phi- 
losopher as from a mad dog.” Lucian himself defines philosophy as an 
attempt to “get an elevation from which you may see in every direction.” 
From such an elevation fife seems to him a ridiculous confusion, a chaotic 
chorus in which all the dancers move and shout each at his own individual 
will, “until the impresario dismisses them one by one from the stage.” ®'' In 
“Charon” he paints a dark picture of the human scene as witnessed by super- 
human eyes from some celestial peak: men plowing, toiling, disputino-, suino- 
in the courts, lending at usury, cheating and being cheated, running after 
gold or pleasure; over their heads a cloud of hopes, fears, follies, and hates; 
over these the Fates spinmng the web of fife for each human atom; one man 
is lifted high from the mass and then has a resounding fall; and each in turn is 
drawn away by some messenger of death. Charon observes two armies fight- 



ROMAN GREECE 


497 


CHAP. XXIIl) 

ing in the Peloponnesus; “Fools! ” he comments, “not to know that though 
each of them should win a whole Peloponnesus he will get but a bare foot of 
ground in the end.” Lucian is as impartial as nature; he satirizes the rich 
for their greed, the poor for their envy, the philosophers for their cobwebs, 
the gods for their nonexistence. In the end he concludes with V oltaire that 
one must cultivate his garden. Menippus, finding Teiresias in the lower 
world, asks him. What is the best life? The old prophet answers: 

The life of the ordinary man is the best and most prudent choice. 

Cease from the folly of metaphysical speculation and inquiry into 
origins and ends; count all this clever logic as idle talk, and pursue 
one end alone— how you may do what your hand finds to do, and go 
your way with never a passion and always a srrule.®^ 

If we sum up Greek thought in the first two centuries of our era, we find it, 
despite Lucian, overwhelmingly religious. Men had once lost faith in faith 
and taken to logic; now they were losing faith in logic and were flocking 
back to faith. Greek philosophy had completed the circuit from primitive 
theology through the skepticism of the early Sophists, the atheism of Democ- 
ritus, the reconciliatory blandishments of Plato, the naturalism of Aristotle, 
and the pantheism of the Stoa back to a philosophy of mystician, submission, 
and piety. The Academy had passed from the utilitarian myths of its founder 
through the skepticism of Cameades to the learned devotion of Plutarch; 
soon it would culminate in the heavenly visions of Plotinus. The scientific 
achievements of Pythagoras were forgotten, but his notion of reincarnation 
was having another fife; Neo-Pythagoreans were exploring the mysticism of 
number, were practicing a daily examination of conscience, and were pray- 
ing that after a minimum of avatars they might pass— if necessary through 
Purgatory— into a blessed union with God.®® Stoicism was ceasing to be the 
proud and scornful philosophy of aristocrats, and had found its final and 
most eloquent voice in a slave; its doctrine of a final conflagration of the 
world, its rejection of all pleasures of the flesh, its humble surrender to the 
hidden will of God, were preparing for the theology and ethics of Christian- 
ity. The Oriental mood was capturing the European citadel. 



CHAPTER XXIV 


The Hellenistic Revival 


1. ROMAN EGYPT 

E gypt should have been the happiest of lands, for not only was the 
earth freely nourished by the Nile, but the country was the most self- 
sufficient in the whole Mediterranean basin— rich in cereals and fruits, cut- 
ting three crops a year, unexcelled in its industries, exporting to a hundred 
nations, and seldom disturbed by foreign or civil war. And yet— perhaps for 
these reasons— “The Egyptians,” Josephus notes, “appear never in all their 
history to have enjoyed one day of freedom.” ^ Their wealth tempted, their 
semitropical lassitude suffered, one despot or conqueror after another 
through fifty centuries. 

Rome classed Egypt not as a province but as the property of the emperor, 
and ruled it through a prefect responsible only to him. Native Greek officials 
administered the three divisions— Lower, Middle, and Upper Egypt, and the 
thirty-six “nomes” or counties; and the official language remained Greek. No 
attempt was made to urbanize the population, for Egypt’s imperial function 
was to be the granary of Rome. Large tracts of land were taken from the priests 
and turned over to Roman or Alexandrian capitalists to be worked as latifundia 
by fellaheen accustomed to merciless exploitation. The state capitalism of the 
Ptolemies was continued in reduced form. Every step in the agricultural process 
was planned and controlled by the state: proliferating bureaucrats determined 
what crops should be sown and in what quantities, annually allotted the requi- 
site seed, received the product into government warehouses {thesauroi, treas- 
uries), exported Rome’s quota, took out taxes in kind, and sold the rest to the 
market. Com and flax were state monopolies from seed to sale; so, at least in the 
Fayum, was the production of bricks, perfumes, and sesame oil.^ Private enter- 
prise was permitted in other fields, but under ubiquitous regulation. All mineral 
resources were owned by the state, and the quarrying of marble and precious 
stones was a governmental privilege. 

Domestic industry, already old in Eg\'pt, now expanded in the tovms- 
Ptolemais, Memphis, Thebes, OxvThynchus, Sais, Bubastis, Naucratis, Heliopolis; 
in Alexandria it was half the life of the vibrant capital. Apparently the paper 
industry had reached the capitalist stage, for Strabo tells how the owners of 
the papyrus plantations limited production to lift the price.^ Priests used the 
temple precincts as factories and turned out fine linens for their own use and 

498 



THE HELLENISTIC REVIVAL 


499 


CHAP. XXIV) 

for the market. Slaves outside of domestic service were few in Egypt, since 
“free” workers were paid only a notch above nudity and starvation. Sometimes 
the workers went on strike {anachoresis, secession)— they left their tasks and took 
sanctuary on temple grounds, whence they were coaxed by hunger or fair 
words. Occasionally wages were raised, prices went up, and all was as before. 
Guilds were permitted, but they were mostly of tradesmen and managers; the 
government used them as agents for the collection of taxes and for the organiza- 
tion of forced labor on dikes, canals, and other public works. 

Internal trade was active but slow. Roads were poor, and land transport moved 
on men, donkeys, or camels— which now replaced horses as draft animals in 
Africa. Much traffic went by inland waterwavs. A great canal, 1 50 feet wide, 
completed in Trajan’s reign, bound the Mediterranean and the Indian Ocean 
through the Nile and the Red Sea, from whose ports at Arsinoe, Myos Hormos, 
and Berenice ships left daily for Africa or India. The banking system that 
financed production and trade was under full governmental control. Each 
nome capital had a state bank, which acted as a receiver of taxes and repository 
of public funds. Loans were made to farmers, industry, and business by the gov- 
ernment, by priests from temple treasuries, and by private lending associations.* 
Taxes were laid upon every product, process, sale, export, or import, even upon 
graves and burials; and additional assessments were levied from time to time, in 
kind from the poor, in liturgies from the rich. From Augustus to Trajan the 
country— or its masters— prospered; after that zenith it succumbed to the dis- 
couragement and exhaustion of endless tribute and taxation and the lethargy 
of a regimented economy. 

Outside of Alexandria and Naucratis Egypt remained sullenly, silently 
Egyptian; Romanization hardly touched it beyond the mouths of the Nile; 
and even Alexandria, which had been the greatest of Greek cities, was assum- 
ing in our second century the character, languages, and odor of an Oriental 
metropolis. Of Egypt’s 8,500,000 population its capital had now some 800,- 
000 “ (in 1930, 573,000), second only to Rome; in industry and commerce 
it was first. Everyone in Alexandria is busy, says a letter questionably 
Hadrian’s; everyone has a trade; even the lame and the blind find work to 
do.® Here, among a thousand other articles, glass, paper, and linen were pro- 
duced on a large scale. Alexandria was the clothing and fashion center of 
the age, setting the styles and making the goods. Its great harbor had nine 
miles of wharves, from which its merchant fleet wove a web of commerce 
over many seas. It was also a tourist center, equipped with hotels, guides, 
and interpreters for visitors coming to see the Pyramids and the majestic 
temples of Thebes. The main avenue, sixty-seven feet wide, was lined for 
three miles with colonnades, arcades, and alluring shops displaying the fanci- 
est products of ancient crafts. At many intersections there were spacious 
squares or circles named plateai, “broad” (ways) —whence the Italian piazza 



CAESAR AND CHRIST 


500 


(chap. XXIV 


and our plaza and place. Imposing structures adorned the central thorough- 
fares— a large theater, an Emporium or exchange, temples to Poseidon, 
Caesar, and Saturn, a celebrated Serapeum or Temple of Serapis, and a 
group of university buildings known over the world as the Museum, or 
Home of the Muses. Of the five sections into which the city was divided, 
one was almost wholly given to the palaces, gardens, and administrative 
buildings of the Ptolemies, now used by the Roman prefect. Here, in a pretty 
mausoleum, lay the city’s founder, Alexander the Great, preserved in honey 
and encased in glass. 

Greeks, Egyptians, Jews, Italians, Arabs, Phoenicians, Persians, Ethiopi- 
ans, Syrians, Libyans, Cilicians, Scythians, Indians, Nubians— nearly every 
Mediterranean people had its quota in Alexandria. They made a volatile and 
inflammable mixture, quarrelsome and disorderly, intellectually clever and 
irreverently witty, shameless in speech, skeptical and superstitious, loose in 
morals and gay in mood, fanatically fond of the theater, music, and public 
games. Dio Chrysostom describes life there as “a continuous revel ... of 
dancers, whistlers, and murderers.” ® The canals were alive with merry- 
makers in gondolas at night on their five-mile sail to the amusement suburb at 
Canopus. There were musical contests that rivaled the horse races in raising 
excitement and claques. 

If we may believe Philo,® forty per cent of the city’s population was 
Jewish. Most Alexandrian Jews were employed in industry and trade, and 
hved in great poverty;^® many were merchants, a few were moneylenders, 
some were rich enough to win enviable places in the government. Originally 
confined to one fifth of the city, they had now overflowed to occupy two 
fifths. They were governed by their own laws and elders, and Rome con- 
firmed the privileges that the Ptolemies had given them to ignore any ordi- 
nance that conflicted with their religion. They gloried in their magnificent 
central synagogue, a colonnaded basilica so vast that a system of signals had 
to be used to secure proper response at proper times from worshipers too 
distant from the sanctuary to hear the words of the priest.^^ According to 
Josephus the moral life of the Alexandrian Jews was exemplary compared 
with the sexual looseness of the “pagan” population.^® They had an active 
intellectual culture and contributed substantially to philosophy, historiog- 
raphy, and science. Racial hostility agitated the city at various times; we 
find in Josephus’ tract Against Apion (an anti-Semitic leader) all the causes, 
arguments, and legends that disturb the relations of Jew and gentile today. 
In A.D. 38 a mob of Greeks invaded the synagogues and insisted on placing 
in each of them a statue of Caligula as a god. The Roman prefect, Avilhus 
Flaccus, annulled the Alexandrian citizenship of the Jews and ordered those 
of them who lived outside the original Jewish section to return to it within 



501 


CHAP. XXIV) THE HELLENISTIC REVIVAL 

a few days. When these had elapsed the Greek populace burned down 400 
Jewish homes, and killed or clubbed Jews, outside the ghetto; and th«y- 
eight members of the Jewish gerousia or senate were arrested and publicly 
scourged in a theater. Thousands of Jews lost their homes, their businesses, 
or their savings. Flaccus’ successor submitted the matter to the Emperor, and 
two separate delegations-five Greeks and five Jews-went to Rome (a.d. 40) 
to plead their causes before Caligula. He died before he could judge. Claudius 
restored the rights of the Jews in Alexandria, confirmed them in their 
municipal citizenship, and sternly bade both factions keep the peace. 


II. PHILO 

The leader of the Jewish delegation to Caligula was the philosopher 
Philo, brother of the arabarch, or manager of the Jewish export trade in 
Alexandria. Eusebius describes him as belonging to an ancient priestly 
family.^® We know hardly anything else of his life; but his pious and gener- 
ous character stands out in the many works that he wrote to expoun 
Judaism to the Greek world. Brought up in a sacerdotal atmosphere, in- 
tensely loyal to his people, and yet fascinated by Greek philosophy, he made 
it the aim of his life to reconcile the Scriptures and customs of the Jews with 
Greek ideas and above all with the philosophy of the most holy Plato. 
He adopted for his purpose the principle that all events, characters, doc- 
trines, and laws in the Old Testament have an allegorical as well as a literal 
meaning and symbolize certain moral or psychological truths; by this 
method he was able to prove anything. He wrote indifferently in Hel^rew, 
but so well in Greek that his admirers said, “Plato writes like Philo. 

He was a theologian rather than a philosopher, a mystic whose intense 
piety presaged Plotinus and the medieval mind. God, in Philo, is the essential 
being of the world, incorporeal, eternal, indescribable; reason can know his 
existence, but can ascribe no quality to him, since every quality is a limita- 
tion. To conceive him as having human form is a concession to the sensuous 
imagination of men. God is everywhere; “what place can a man find where 
God is not?” But he is not everything: matter is also eternal and increate; 
however, it has no life, motion, or form until infused with the divine force. 
To create the world by giving form to matter, and to estabhsh relations with 
man, God used a host of intermediary beings, called angels by the Jews, 
daimones by the Greeks, and Ideas by Plato. These, says Philo, may popu- 
larly be conceived as persons, though really they exist only in the Divine 
Mind, as the thoughts and powers of God.^® Together these powers con- 
stitute what the Stoics called the Logos, or Divine Reason creating and 



CAESAR AND CHRIST 


50? 


(chap. XXIV 


guiding the world. Fluctuating between philosophy and theology, between 
ideas and personifications, Philo sometimes thinks of the Logos as a person; 
in a poetic moment he calls the Logos “the first-begotten of God,” son 
of God by the virgin Wisdom,^® and says that through the Logos God has 
revealed himself to man. Since the soul is part of God, it can through reason 
rise to a mystic vision not quite of God, but of the Logos. Perhaps, if we 
could free ourselves from the taint of matter and sense, and by ascetic exer- 
cises and long contemplation become for a moment pure spirit, we might 
for an ecstatic moment see God himself.^® 

Philo’s Logos was one of the most influential ideas in the history of 
thought. Its antecedents in Heracleitus, Plato, and the Stoics are obvious; 
presumably he knew the recent Jewish literature that had made a distinct 
person of the Wisdom of God as creator of the world; and he must have 
been impressed by those lines in Proverbs (viii, 22) where Wisdom says, 
“The Lord possessed me in the beginning of his way, before his works of 
old. I was set up from everlasting ... or ever the earth was.” Philo was a 
contemporary of Christ; he apparently never heard of him; but he shared 
unknowingly in forming Christian theology. The rabbis frowned upon his 
allegorical interpretations as likely to be used as an excuse for neglecting 
literal obedience to the Law; they suspected the Logos doctrine as a retreat 
from monotheism; and they saw in Philo’s passion for Greek philosophy a 
threat of cultural assimilation, racial dilution, and consequent disappearance, 
of the dispersed Jews. But the Fathers of the Church admired the Jew’s con- 
templative devotion, made abundant use of his allegorical principles to 
answer the critics of the Hebrew Scriptures, and joined with Gnostics and 
Neo-Platonists in accepting the mystical vision of God as the crown of 
human enterprise. Philo had tried to mediate between Hellenism and Judaism. 
From the Judaic point of view he had failed; from the historical point of 
view he had succeeded; and the result was the first chapter of the Gospel 
of John. 


III. THE PROGRESS OF SCIENCE 

In science Alexandria was the unchallenged head of the Hellenistic world. 
Claudius Ptolemy must be ranked among the most influential astronomers 
of antiquity, for despite Copernicus the world is still Ptolemaic in its speech. 
Bom at Ptolemais on the Nile (whence his name), he hved most of his life 
at Alexandria, where he made observations from a.d. 127^151. The world 
remembers him chiefly for his rejection of Aristarchus’ theory that the earth 
revolves around the sun. This immortal error was enshrined in Ptolemy’s 
Mathematike Syntaxis, or “iMathematical Arrangement” of the stars. The 



THE HELLENISTIC REVIVAL 


503 


CHAP. XXIV) 

Arabs referred to the work with a Greek superlative as Al-megiste, “The 
Greatest”; and the Middle Ages corrupted the phrase into Almagest, by 
which the book is known to history. It ruled the skies till Copernicus upset 
the world. And yet Ptolemy did not claim to do more than systematize the 
work and observation of previous astronomers, Hipparchus above all. He 
pictured the universe as spherical and as daily revolving around a spherical, 
motionless earth. Strange as this view seems to us (though there is no telling 
what some future Copernicus will do to our present Ptolemies), the geo- 
centric hypothesis made it possible to compute the position of the stars and 
planets more accurately than the heliocentric conception could do in the 
state of astronomic knowledge at the time.^® Ptolemy suggested further a 
theory of eccentrics to explain the orbits of the planets, and discovered the 
evection, or orbital aberration, of the moon. He measured the moon’s dis- 
tance from the earth by the parallax method still in use, and calculated it as 
fifty-nine times the earth’s radius. This is approximately our current reckon- 
ing; but Ptolemy followed Poseidonius in underestimating the diameter of 
the earth. 

Just as the Syntaxis gathered ancient astronomy into its final form, so 
Ptolemy’s Geographical Outline summarized antiquity’s knowledge of the 
earth’s surface. Here, too, his industrious tables of latitude and longitude 
for the major cities of the globe were vitiated by accepting Poseidonius’ 
modest estimate of the earth; but to this encouraging mistake, as transmitted 
by Ptolemy, Columbus owed his behef in the possibility of reaching the Indies 
in a practicable time by sailing west.-^ Ptolemy was the first to use the terms 
parallels and meridians in geography; and in his maps he successfully pro- 
jected a spherical upon a flat surface. But he was a mathematician rather than 
an astronomer or a geographer; his work consisted chiefly in mathematical 
formulations. In the Syntaxis he drew up an excellent table of chords. He 
divided the radius of the earth into sixty partes minutae primae (“first small 
parts”), which became our “minutes,” and subdivided each of these into 
sixty partes miniitae secundae (“second small parts”), now our “seconds.” 

Though he made many mistakes, Ptolemy had the temper and patience of 
a true scientist. He tried to rest all conclusions upon observation— too seldom 
his own. In one field he carried out a long series of experiments: his Optica, 
a study of refraction, has been acclaimed as “the most remarkable experi- 
mental research of antiquity.” *' It is significant that this greatest astronomer, 
geographer, and mathematician of his age wrote also a Tetrabiblios, or 
“Four Books,” on the control of human hfe by the stars. 

Meanwhile a minor Archimedes was giving the classic world a second 
chance to stage an industrial revolution. A brilliant inventor or compiler, of 



CAESAR AND CHRIST 


504 


(chap. XXIV 


whom we know only the one name, Hero, issued in this age* at Alexandria 
a long succession of treatises on mathematics and physics, of which several 
have been preserved through Arabic translations. He warned his readers 
frankly that the theorems and inventions which he presented were not neces- 
sarily his own, but were the accumulations of centuries. In the Dioptra he 
described an instrument like the theodolite, and formulated principles for 
measuring, by surveying, the distances to inaccessible points. In the Aie- 
chanica he considered the uses and combinations of simple devices like the 
wheel, axle, lever, pulley, wedge, and screw. In the Fnemnatica he studied 
air pressure in seventy-eight experiments, most of them playful tricks; e.g., 
he showed how either wine or water could be made to flow from the same 
small orifice in the bottom of a jug by closing one or the other of the air 
holes at the top of the divided container. 

From these amusements he was led on to make a force pump, a fire-engine 
pump with piston and valves, a hydraulic clock, a water organ, and a steam 
engine. In this contraption the steam from heated water was passed into a 
globe by a tube, and escaped through curved outlets at opposite sides, causing 
the globe to revolve in a direction contrary to that of the expelled steam. 
Hero’s keen sense of humor kept him from developing this invention to 
industrial uses. He employed steam to support a ball in mid-air, to make a 
mechanical bird sing, to cause a statue to blow a horn. So in the Catoptrica he 
studied the reflection of light and showed how to construct mirrors that 
would enable a person to see his back, or appear with head downward, or 
with three eyes, two noses, etc. He told magicians how to perform tricks 
by concealed apparatus. He made water pour from a font when a coin was 
inserted in the slot. He constructed a hidden machine by which heated water 
overflowed into a bucket, whose increasing weight, by pulleys, opened 
temple doors. In these and a hundred other ways Hero succeeded in being a 
thaumaturgist, and failed to become a Watt. 

Alexandria had long since been the chief center of medical education. 
There were famous schools of medicine at Marseilles, Lyons, Sarao-ossa, 
Athens, Antioch, Cos, Ephesus, Smyrna, and Pergamum; but medical stu- 
dents came to the Egyptian capital from every province. Even as late as the 
fourth century, when Egypt was in decline, Ammianus Marcellinus wrote 
that “it is enough to commend a physician’s skill if he can say that he was 
trained at Alexandria.” Specialization was progressing; “no one can be a 
universal physician,” said Philostratus (ca. a.d. 225); “there must be special- 
ists for wounds, fevers, eyes, consumption.” Dissection of cadavers was 
practiced at Alexandria, and there seem to have been cases of human vivi- 

• His date is disputed. Pauly-Wissowa place him about 50 b.c.; Heiberg Diels and Heath 

about A.D. 225.23 ! 



CHAP. XXIV) THE HELLENISTIC REVIVAL 5°5 

section.'® Surgery was probably as well developed there in the first century 
A.D. as anywhere in Europe before the nineteenth century. Women physi- 
cians were not rare; one of them, Metrodora,. wrote an extant treatise on 
diseases of the womb.^^ Great names adorned the medical history of this age: 
Rufus of Ephesus, who described the anatomy of the eye, distin^ished 
between motor and sensory nerves, and improved methods for stopping the 
flow of blood in surgery; Maiinus of Alexandria, famous for his operations 
on the skull; and Antyllus, the greatest ophthalmologist of the time. Dios- 
corides of Cilicia (a.d. 40-90) wrote a Materia Medica which scientifically 
described 600 medical plants so well that his book remained the chief author- 
ity on its subject until the Renaissance. He recommended medicated pes- 
saries for contraception;^® and his recipe for wine of mandragora to produce 
surgical anesthesia was successfully applied in 1874.^ 

Soranus of Ephesus, about a.d. i 16, published a treatise on the diseases of 
women and the birth and care of children; it ranks only below the Hippo- 
cratic collection and the works of Galen among the extant products of an- 
cient medicine. He describes a vaginal speculum and an obstetric chair, gives 
an excellent anatomy of the uterus, offers almost modem dietetic and opera- 
tive advice, such as bathing the eyes of the newborn child with oil,®® sug- 
gests half a hundred contraceptive devices, mostly by vaginal medication,®^ 
and (unlike Hippocrates) allows abortion where delivery would endanger 
the mother’s life.®® Soranus was the greatest gynecologist of antiquity; no 
advance was made on his work till Pare, fifteen centuries after him. If all his 
forty treatises were extant we should probably rank him with Galen. 

The most famous physician of the period was the son of a Pergamese 
architect, who named him Galenus, i.e., quiet and peaceable, in the hope 
that he would not take after his mother.®® At fourteen the youth found his 
first love in philosophy, from whose dangerous lure he was never freed. At 
seventeen he turned to medicine, studied in Cihcia, Phoenicia, Palestine, 
Cyprus, Crete, Greece, and Alexandria (a mobility typical of ancient schol- 
ars), served as a surgeon in the gladiatorial school at Pergamum, and prac- 
ticed for a time in Rome (a.d. 164-68). There his successful cures brought 
him many rich patients, and his lectures drew distinguished audiences. His 
repute rose to such a point that people wrote to him from every province for 
medical advice; and he confidently prescribed by mail. His good father, for- 
getting the purpose of his name, had counseled him to join no sect or party 
and always to tell the tmth. Galen obeyed, exposed the ignorance and 
venality of many physicians in Rome, and in a few years had to flee from 
his enemies. Marcus Aurelius called him back to care for young Commodus 
(169) and tried to take him on a Marcomannic campaign; but Galen was 



5o6 CAESAR AND CHRIST ( CHAP. XXIV 

clever enough to be soon back in Rome. Thereafter we know nothing of 
him except his works. 

He was almost as voluminous as Aristotle. Of 500 volumes ascribed to 
him some 1 18 have survived, covering in 20,000 pages all branches of medi- 
cine and several fields of philosophy. They are of httle medical value today, 
but they abound in incidental information and in the vitality of a vigorous 
and controversial spirit. His fondness for philosophy had given him a bad 
habit of drawing large deductions from small inductions; his faith in his 
own knowledge and powers often betrayed him into a dogmatism impossible 
to a scientific mind; and his great authority prolonged for centuries the life 
of serious errors. Nevertheless, he was an accurate observer and the most 
experimental of ancient physicians. “I confess the disease from which I have 
suffered all my life— to trust ... no statements until, so far as possible, I 
have tested them for myself.” Forbidden by the Roman government to 
dissect the human body alive or dead, he dissected and vivisected animals, 
and sometimes too readily concluded to human anatomy from a study of 
apes, dogs, cows, and pigs. 

Despite his limitations Galen made more contributions to anatomy than 
any other observer in antiquity. He described accurately the bones of the 
cranium and the spinal column, the muscular system, the lacteal vessels, the 
ducts of the lingual and submaxillary glands, and the valves of the heart. 
He showed that an excised heart can continue to beat outside the body; he 
proved that the arteries contain blood, not air (as the Alexandrian school 
had taught for 400 years) . He missed anticipating Harvey; he thought that 
most of the blood traveled forth as well as back in the veins, while the re- 
mainder, mixed with air from the lungs, moved to and fro in the arteries. 
He was the first to explain the mechanism of respiration, and brilliantly con- 
jectured that the principal element in the air we breathe is also that which is 
active in combustion.®® He differentiated pleurisy and pneumonia, described 
aneurism, cancer, and tuberculosis, and recognized the infectious nature of 
the last. Above all, he founded experimental neurology. He made the first 
experimental sections of the spinal cord, determined the sensory and motor 
functions of each segment, understood the sympathetic system, recognized 
seven of the twelve pairs of cranial nerves, and caused aphasia at will by 
cutting the laryngeal nerve. He showed that injuries to one side of the brain 
produce derangements in the opposite side of the body. He cured the sophist 
Pausanias of numbness in the fourth and fifth fingers of the left hand by 
stimulating the brachial plexus in which the ulnar nerve arises that controls 
those fingers.®® He was so skilled in symptomatology that he preferred to 
diagnose without questioning the patient.®® He made much use of diet, 
exercise, and massage, but he was also an expert on drugs and traveled widely 



CHAP.XXIV) THE HELLENISTIC REVIVAL 507 

to secure rare medicines. He condemned the prescription of offal and urine, 
still popular with seme cf his contemporaries,®* recommended dried cicadas 
for colic, applied goat dung to a tumor, and gave a long list of illnesses that 
could be cured by theriac— a famous drug made as an antidote for Mith- 
ridates the Great, daily imbibed by Marcus Aurelius, and containing the 
flesh of snakes.*® 

He tarnished his record as an experimentalist by a torrent of precipitate 
theory. He ridiculed magic and spells, accepted divination by dreams, and 
thought that the phases of the moon affected the condition of patients. He 
took up Hippocrates’ notion of the four humors (blood and phlegm, black 
and yellow bile),* added a dash of Pythagoras’ doctrine of four elements 
(earth, air, fire, and water), and tried to reduce all diseases to derangement of 
these humors or these elements. He was a firm vitalist, convinced that a 
pneimia, a vital breath or spirit, pervaded and activated every part of the 
body. Mechanistic interpretations of biology had been advanced by several 
physicians, as for example by Asclepiades, who held that physiology should 
be treated as a branch of physics; Galen objected that whereas a machine 
is merely the sum of its parts, an organism implies the purposive control of 
the parts by the whole. And just as purpose alone can explain the origin, 
structure, and function of organs, so the universe, Galen thought, can be 
understood only as the expression and instrument of some divine plan. 
God, however, operates solely through natural laws; there are no miracles, 
and the best revelation is Nature herself. 

Galen’s teleology and monotheism won him favor with Christians, as 
later with Moslems. Nearly all his writings were lost to Europe in the chaos 
of the barbarian invasions, but in the East they were preserved by Arab 
scholars, and were translated from Arabic into Latin from the eleventh cen’ 
tury onward. Galen became then an uncriticized authority, an Aristotle for 
medieval medicine. 

The last creative age of Greek science ended with Ptolemy and Galen. 
Experiment ceased, dogma ruled; mathematics relapsed into restatements 
of geometry, biology into Aristotle, natural science into Pliny; and medicine 
marked time until the Arab and Jewish physicians of the Middle Ages re- 
newed the noblest of the sciences. 


rv. POETS IN THE DESERT 

Across the Red Sea from Eg)"pt lay Arabia. Neither the Pharaohs nor the 
Achaemenids nor the Seleucids nor the Ptolemies nor the Romans had been able 


* Cf. the emphasis of current medicine on glandular secretions. 



5o8 CAESAR AND CHRIST (CHAP. XXIV 

to conquer the mysterious peninsula. Arabia Deserta knew only Arab nomads, 
but in the southwest a mountain range and its streams gave milder temperatures 
and fruitful vegetation to Arabia Felix, the Yemen of today. In those recesses 
the little kingdom of Saba hid, the Sheba of the Bible, so rich in frankincense 
and myrrh, cassia and cinnamon, aloes and nard, senna and gum and precious 
stones that the Sabateans could build at Mariaba and elsewhere cities proud 
with temples, palaces, and colonnades.^® Arab merchants not only sold Arab 
products at high prices, but carried on a caravan trade with northwestern Asia 
and an active commerce by sea with Egypt, Parthia, and India. In 25 b.c. 
Augustus sent Aelius Gallus to absorb the kingdom into the Empire; the legions 
failed to take Mariaba and returned to Egypt decimated by disease and heat. 
Augustus contented himself with destroying the Arab port at Adana (Aden) 
and thereby secured control of the trade between Egypt and India. 

The main commercial route running north from Mariaba went through the 
northwest comer of the peninsula, known to the ancients as Arabia Petraea from 
its capital at Petra, some forty miles south of Jerusalem. The city had been named 
from the circle of steep crags within which it was strategically placed. There, 
in the second century b.c., the Nabatean Arabs established a kingdom that slowly 
grew rich on passing caravans, until its rule extended from Leuce Come on the 
Red Sea along the eastern border of Palestine through Gerasa and Bostra to 
Damascus. Under King Aretas IV (9 b.c.-a.d. 40) the country reached its zenith; 
Petra became a Hellenistic city, Aramaic in speech, Greek in art, Alexandrian 
in the splendor of its streets. To this time belong the finest of the giant tombs 
that were carved into the rocks outside the city— crude but powerful fafades 
of double-tiered Greek colonnades, sometimes a hundred feet in height. After 
Trajan annexed Arabia Petraea into the Empire ( 106), Bostra became the capital 
of the province of Arabia, and raised in its turn the architectural symbols of 
wealth and power. Petra decayed as Bostra and Palmyra became the crossroads 
of the desert caravans, and the great tombs lapsed into “the nightstalls of nomad 
flocks.” « 

The most striking feature of the great Empire was its numerous and populous 
cities. Never again till our own century has urbanization been so pronounced. 
Lucullus, Pompey, Caesar, Herod, Hellenistic kings and Roman emperors prided 
themselves on founding new cities and embellishing old ones. So, moving north- 
ward along the eastern Mediterranean coast, one could hardly go twenty miles 
without encountering a city— Raphia (Rafa), Gaza, Ascalon, Joppa (Jaffa) 
Apollonia, Samaria-Sebaste, and Caesarea (Kaisaria). These cities, though in 
Palestine, were half Greek in population and predominantly Greek in language, 
culture, and institutions; they were Hellenistic bridgeheads in the pagan invasion 
of Judea. Herod spent large sums making Caesarea worthy of Augustus, for 
whom it was named; he provided it with a fine harbor, a lofty temple, a theater, 
an amphitheater, “sumptuous palaces, and many edifices of white stone.” 
Farther inland were other Greek Palestinian cities-Livias, Philadelphia, Gerasa 



CHAP.XXIV) THE HELLENISTIC REVIVAL 509 

(Djerasch), and Gadara (Katra). At Gerasa stand a hundred columns of the 
colonnade that lined the main street; and the ruins of temples, theater, baths, and 
aqueduct proclaim the affluence of the town in the second century a.d. 

Gadara, where the remains of two theaters echo with memories of Greek 
plays, was famous for its schools, professors, and authors. Here, in the third 
century b.c., had lived Menippus, the Cynic philosopher and humorist whose 
satires taught that everything is vain except an upright life, and gave a model 
to Lucilius, Varro, and Horace. Here in his “Syrian Athens,” some hundred 
years before Christ, Meleager, the Anacreon of the age, polished epigrams to 
fair ladies and handsome boys and wore out his pen with love. 

Brightly the goblet smiles since rested here 
Zenophila’s sweet mouth, to Love so dear. 

How blest would she to mine her rose-lips place, 

And drink my soul out in a long embrace.^® 

One of these flames, too soon snuffed out, burned with especial brightness in 
his memory— Heliodora, whom he loved in Tyre. 

I’ll twine white violets, and the myrtle green; 

Narcissus will I twine, and lilies sheen; 

m twine sweet crocus, and the hyacinth blue; 

And last I’ll twine the rose, love’s token true: 

That all may form a wreath of beauty, meet 

To deck my Heliodora’s tresses sweet. 

Now “Hades has snatched her, and the dust has tarnished her flower in bloom. 
O Mother Earth, I pray thee, clasp her gently to thy breast.” 

Meleager immortalized himself by gathering into a “garland” (stephanos) 
the elegiac verse of Greece from Sappho to Meleager; out of this and like 
collections grew, by merger, the Greek Airthology * Here is the Greek 
epigram at its best and worst, polished like a jewel or empty as a pose; it was 
unwise to pluck these 4000 “flowers” from their branches to make this fading 
wreath. Some of the verses commemorate forgotten great men, or famous 
statues, or dead relatives; some, so to speak, are autotaphs, as wfflen a woman 
who died of triplets says pithily, “After this let women pray for children.” 
Some are barbs aimed at physicians, shrews, undertakers, pedagogues, 
cuckolds; or the miser who, fainting, is revived by the smell of a penny; 
or the grammarian whose grandchild displayed successively all three gen- 
ders; or the pugilist who retires, marries, and gets more blows than he ever 

* Meleager’s Stephanos was combined in our sixth century with the Musa Paidike, a homo- 
sexual anthology compiled by Strabo of Sardis (50 b.c.). Subsequent additions were made, 
chiefly of Christian verse; and the Anthology was given its present form at Constantinople 
about A.D. 920. 



CAESAR AND CHRIST 


510 


(chap. XXIV 


received in the ring; or the dwarf who, carried off by a mosquito, thinks he 
is suffering the rape of Ganymede. A single epigram celebrates “that famous 
woman who slept with only one man.” Others dedicate offerings to the 
gods: Lais hangs up her mirror as useless now that it does not show her as 
she was; Nicias, after fifty years of serving men, surrenders her complaisant 
girdle to Venus. Some stanzas glorify the arterial dilation of wine as wiser 
than wisdom. One honors the unceasing monogamy of the adulterer who 
was buried by a wreck in the arms of his mistress. Some are pagan dirges on 
the brevity of life; some are Christian assurances of a happy resurrection. 
Most of them, of course, toast the beauty of women and boys and sing the 
painful ecstasy of love: everything that later literature has said about 
amorous itching is here said in brief and in full, with more than Elizabethan 
conceits. Meleager makes a mosquito his pander by charging it with a 
message to his lady of the hour. And his townsman Philodemus, philosophic 
mentor of Cicero, tunes a melancholy note to his Xantho: 


White waxen cheeks, soft scented breast. 
Deep eyes wherein the Muses nest. 

Sweet lips that perfect pleasure bring— 

Sing me your song, pale Xantho, sing. . , , 
Too soon the music ends. Again, 

Again repeat the sad, sweet strain. 

With perfumed fingers touch the string; 

O Love’s delight, pale Xantho, sing.*® 


V. THE SYRIANS 

Northward along the coast lay the ancient cities of Phoenicia, part, with 
Palestine, of the province of Syria. Their industrious workers skilled in 
handicrafts, their favored position as traditional ports of trade, their rich 
and subtle merchants sending ships and agents everywhere, had kept them 
alive through all the vicissitudes of a thousand years. Tyre (Sur) had taller 
dwellings than Rome’s and worse slums; it stank with the smell of its dye- 
ing establishments, but it consoled itself with the thought that the whole 
world bought its richly colored textiles, above all its purple silks. Sidon had 
probably discovered the art of blowing glass and now specialized in glass 
and bronze. Berytus (Beirut) was distinguished for its schools of medicine, 
rhetoric, and law; ver}^ likely from this university the great jurists Ulpian 
and Papinian went to Rome. 

No province of the Empire surpassed Syria in industry and prosperity. Where 
now 3,000,000 inhabitants find a precarious existence, 10,000,000 lived in Trajan’s 



CHAP.XXIV) THE HELLENISTIC REVIVAL 5^1 

time.®® Half a hundred cities here enjoyed the pure water, the public baths, the 
underground drainage system, the clean markets, the gymnasia and palaestras, 
the lectures and music, the schools and temples and basilicas, the porticoes and 
arches, the public statuary and picture galleries, characteristic of the Hellenistic 
cities in the first century after Christ.®* The oldest of them was Damascus, over 
the Lebanons from Sidon, fortified by the surrounding desert, and turned almost 
into a garden by the spreading arms and tributaries of a stream gratefully called 
“the river of gold.” Alany caravan routes converged here, and poured into the 
bazaars the products of three continents. 

Returning over the Anti-Lebanon hills and moving north over dusty roads, 
the modem traveler is astonished to find, in the tiny village of Baalbek, the ruins 
of two majestic temples and a propylaeum, once the pride of Heliopolis, the 
Greco-Roman-Svrian City of the Sun. Augustus planted a small colony there, 
and the town grew as the sacred seat of Baal the Sun-God and as the meeting 
point of roads to Damascus, Sidon, and Beirut. Under Antoninus Pius and his 
successors Roman, Greek, and Syrian architects and engineers raised, on the site 
of an old Phoenician temple to Baal, an imposing shrine to luppiter Heliopoli- 
tanus. It was built of huge monoliths from a quarry a mOe away; one block 
measures sixty-two by fourteen by eleven feet, and contains enough stone for 
a commodious house. Fifty-one marble steps 150 feet wide lead up to the 
propylaeum, a Corinthian portico. Beyond a colonnaded forecourt and court 
rose the main temple, of which fifty-eight columns still tower sixty-two feet into 
the air. Near it are the remains of a smaller temple, variously attributed to A^’enus, 
Bacchus, and Demeter; nineteen cf its columns survive, and a handsome portal 
delicately carved. Resplendent in their solitary grandeur under the unclouded 
sun, the columns of these temples are among the fairest extant works of man. 
Seeing them we feel, better than in Italy, the grandeur that was Rome, the 
wealth and courage, skill and taste that could build, in so many scattered cities, 
temples greater and more majestic than the crowded capital ever knew. 

A similar sight meets the traveler who strikes eastward across the desert 
from Homs, the ancient Emesa, to Tadmor, which the Greeks translated into 
Palmyra, City of a Alyriad Palms. Its fortunate position and fertile soil around 
two gushing springs on the roads from Emesa and Damascus to the Euphrates 
made it grow in affluence until it was one of the major cities of the East; and its 
distance from other settlements enabled it to maintain practical independence 
despite nominal allegiance to Seleucid kings or Roman emperors. Its wide central 
thoroughfare was flanked by shady porticoes containing 454 columns; and at 
the four main crossings were stately arches, of which one remains to let us judge 
the rest. The glory of the city w’as the Temple of the Sun, dedicated (a.d. 30) 
to the supreme trinity of Bel (Baal), Yarhibol (the sun), and Aglibol (the moon). 
Its size continued Assyrian traditions of immensity. Its court, the largest in the 
Empire, had an unrivaled colonnade 4000 feet long, much of it composed of 
Corinthian columns running four abreast. Within the court and the temple were 



CAESAR AND CHRIST 


512 


(chap. XXIV 


paintings and sculptures whose extant examples reveal the approach of Palmyra 
to Parthia in art as in geography. 

A main route eastward from Palmyra reached the Euphrates at Dura-Europus. 
There (a.d. ioo) the merchants shared their gains with the Palmyrene trinity by 
rearing a temple half Greek and half Indian; and an eastern painter adorned the 
walls with frescoes that vividly illustrate the Oriental origin of Byzantine and 
early Christian art.®^ Earther north on the great river were other important 
crossing towns at Thapsacus and Zeugma. Turning westward from Thapsacus 
the traveler passed through Beroea (Aleppo) and Apamea to the Mediterranean 
at Laodicea— still keeping its ancient name as Latakia, and still an active port. 
Between it and Apamea the river Orontes flowed north, between shores largely 
pre-empted by rich estates, to Antioch (Antakia), capital of Syria. The river, 
and a great network of roads, brought the goods of the East to Antioch, while 
its Mediterranean port, Seleucia Pieria, fourteen miles down the stream, brought 
in the products of the West. Most of the city rose on a mountain slope and had 
the Orontes at its feet; it was a picturesque location, that helped Antioch rival 
Rhodes as the most beautiful city of the Hellenic East. It had a system of street 
lighting that made it safe and brilliant at night. The main avenue, four and a 
half miles long, was paved with granite and had a covered colonnade on either 
side, so that people could walk from one end of the town to the other immune 
to rain and sun. Pure water was supplied in abundance to every home. The 
complex population of 600,000 Greeks, Syrians, and Jews was notoriously gay, 
pursuing pleasure relentlessly, laughing at the pompous Romans who came to 
govern them, oscillating between the circus and the amphitheater, the brothels 
and the baths, and taking full advantage of Daphne, their famous suburban park. 
Festivals were numerous, and Aphrodite had a share in all of them. During the 
feast of Brumalia, lasting through most of December, the whole city, says a 
contemporary, resembled a tavern, and the streets rang all night with song and 
revelry.®* There were schools of rhetoric, philosophy, and medicine, but Antioch 
was not a center of learning. Its populace lived intensely for the day; and when 
it needed rehgion it flocked to astrologers, magicians, miracle-workers, and 
charlatans. 

The general picture of Syria under Roman rule is one of prosperity more 
continuous than in any other province. Most of the workers were freemen, 
except in domestic service. The upper classes were Hellenized, the lower re- 
mained Oriental; in the same town Greek philosophers rubbed elbows with 
temple prostitutes and emasculated priests; and even till Hadrian children were 
now and then offered as sacrifices to the gods.®^ Sculpture and painting took on 
a semi-Oriental, half-medieval face and form. The Greek language prevailed in 
government and literature, but native tongues— chiefly Aramaic— remained the 
speech of the people. Scholars were plenty and made the world ring with their 
moment’s fame. Nicolaus of Damascus, besides mentoring Antony, Cleopatra, 
and Herod, undertook the wearj' task of writing a universal history-a labor, he 




Fig. Temple of hippiter Heliopolitamis at Baalbek 





CHAP.XXIV) THE HELLENISTIC REVIVAL 513 

tells us, that Hercules himself would have shunned.®® Time in its tenderness has 
buried all his works, as at its leisure it will cover ours. 


VI. ASIA MINOR 

North of Syria was the client kingdom— later the province— of Commagene, 
with a populous capital at Samosata, Lucian’s childhood home. Across the 
Euphrates stood the little realm of Osrhoene; Rome fortified its capital, Edessa 
(Urfa), as a base against Parthia; we shall hear more of it in Christian days. 
Westward from Syria one passed into Cilicia (as now into Turkey) at Alex- 
andria Issi (Alexandretta). This, Cicero’s province, was highly civilized along 
the southern Asia Minor coast, but still barbarous in the Taurus hiUs. Tarsus 
(Tersous), the capital, was “no mean city,” said its son Saint Paul, but was re- 
nowned for its schools and philosophers. 

Over against Cilicia, in the Mediterranean, the island of Cyprus pursued its 
immemorial life of mining copper, cutting cypress, building ships, and bearing 
patiently a succession of conquerors. The lucrative mines were owned by Rome 
and worked by slaves. Galen describes how in his time a mine there collapsed 
and crushed hundreds of workers— a periodical incident in the geological basis 
of human comforts and powers. 

North of Cilicia lay arid and mountainous Cappadocia, mining precious metals, 
and raising wheat, cattle, and slaves for export. West of it, Lycaonia would enter 
into history with the visits of Saint Paul to Derbe, Lystra, and Iconium. Again 
north was Galatia, setded and named by the Gauls in the third century b.c.; its 
most famous product was the Black Stone of Pessinus, sent to Rome as a symbol 
of Cybele; its chief city was Ancyra, capital of the Hittites 3500 years ago, and 
of Turkey today. West of Cilicia, the province of Pisidia counted fine cities 
within its borders, like Xanthus, now recovering from its mass suicide before 
Brutus, and Aspendus, whose theater is so well preserved that one easily imagines 
it filling again to hear Menander or Euripides. 

West and north of Pisidia was the province of “Asia,” divided into Phrygia, 
Caria, Lydia, and Mysia. Here, where the civilization of Ionia still flourished 
after a thousand years, Philostratus counted 500 towns, with a total population 
far greater than the region supports today. The countryside was fertile, the 
crafts had grown in skill from age to age, and the ports profited from the 
development of rich markets in Italy, Africa, Spain, and Gaul. Phrygia was 
mountainous, but it boasted large cities like Apamea Celaenae— ranked by Strabo 
as second only to Ephesus in “Asia”— and Laodicea, fortunate in its philanthropic 
philosophers and millionaires. Cnidus was yet important enough to make an 
alliance with Rome; but Halicarnassus had declined from Herodotus to Dionysius 
—an excellent literary critic, an uncritical historian. Miletus was no longer in its 
prime, though still an active port; the oracle of Apollo in the temple at near-by 



CAESAR AND CHRIST 


514 


(chap. XXIV 


Didyma continued to answer questions with puzzles; and the storytellers of the 
region were weaving those amorous picaresque “Milesian tales” that would soon 
develop into the Greek novel. Priene was a minor town, but its citizens vied 
honorably in making it fair with fine buildings. Here, in the first century b.c., 
a woman, Phile, was elected to the highest municipal office; the influence of 
wealth and Rome was raising the status of woman in Hellenic lands. Magnesia 
on the Maeander had what many rated as the most nearly perfect temple in 
Asia— dedicated to Artemis (129 b.c.), and designed by Hermogenes, the supreme 
architect of the age. At Mycale the koinon, or Commons, stiU met annually as a 
general council and religious union for Ionia. 

Of the islands lying off the Carian coast Cos prospered with its silk industry 
and its medical school, rich with traditions of Hippocrates, and Rhodes (i.e., 
the Rose) was even in her decline the most beautiful city of the Greek world. 
When, after the Civil War, Augustus sought to relieve the distress of the eastern 
cities by allowing the cancellation of all debts, Rhodes refused to avail herself 
of the expedient and met all her obligations faithfully. As a result she rapidly 
regained her place as banker to the Aegean trade and became again a halfway 
port for vessels plying between Asia and Egypt. The city was celebrated for 
its fallen Colossus, its handsome buildings, its famous statuary, its clean and , 
orderly streets, its competent aristocratic government, its celebrated schools of 
rhetoric and philosophy. Here Apollomus Molo taught Caesar and Cicero those 
arts of style which through them influenced all later Latin prose. 

The most famous Rhodian of this period was Poseidonius, the last great 
synthetic mind of antiquity. Bom at Syrian Apamea (135 b.c.), he first earned 
fame as a long-distance runner. After studying under Panaetius in Athens he 
made Rhodes his home, served her as magistrate and ambassador, traveled into 
many provinces, returned to Rhodes, and drew such men as Pompey and Cicero 
to his lectures on the Stoic philosophy. At 83 he went to live in Rome and died 
there a year later. His lost Universal H/rtory— covering Rome and its possessions 
from 144 to 82 B.C.— was ranked by ancient scholars as equal to the work of 
Polybius. His report of his travels in Gaul and his treatise On the Ocean were 
basic sources for Strabo. His calculation of the sun’s distance from the earth— 
52,000,000 miles— was closer than that of any other ancient student to our modem 
reckoning. He went to Cadiz to study the tides, and explained them by the 
joint action of the sun and the moon. He underestimated the distance across 
the Atlantic and predicted that one sailing from Spain would come to India 
after 8000 miles. Despite his wide acquaintance with natural science, he accepted 
many of the spiritualistic ideas of his nrm—daimones, divination, astrology, 
telepathy, and the power of the soul to rise to a mystic union with God, whom 
he defined as the Life-Force of the world. Cicero too generously ranked him 
as the greatest of the Stoics; we might also consider him a forerunner of the 
Neo-Platonists, a bridge from Zeno to Plotinus. 

Following the coast of Asia northward from Caria, the traveler entered Lydia 



CHAP.XXIV) THE HELLENISTIC REVIVAL 515 

and its greatest city, Ephesus. It flourished under the Romans as never before. 
Though Pergamum was the formal capital of “Asia,” Ephesus became the seat 
of the Roman proconsul and his staff; it was also the main port of the province 
and the meeting place of the provincial assembly. Its polyglot population of 
225,000 ranged from philanthropic sophists to a noisy and superstitious rabble. 
The streets were well paved and lighted and had miles of shady porticoes. There 
were the usual public buildings, some unearthed as late as 1894: a “museum” or 
scientific center, a medical school, a library with a strangely baroque fa9ade, 
and a theater that seated 56,000 persons; here Demetrius the image-maker would 
arouse the populace against Saint Paul. The center (and chief bank) of the city 
was the Temple of Artemis, surrounded by 128 columns each the gift of a king. 
The eunuch priests were attended by virgin priestesses and a swarm of slaves; 
the rites were a mixture of Oriental and Greek; the barbarous statue that rep- 
resented the goddess had two rows of supernumerary breasts, symbolizing fer- 
tility. The Festival of Artemis made all May a month of rejoicing, feasting, 
and games. 

Smyrna, despite its fishermen, had a better atmosphere. Apollonius of Tyana, 
who traveled far and wide, called it “the most beautiful city under the sun.” 

It was proud of its long, straight streets, its double-tiered colonnades, its library, 
and its university. One of its most famous sons, AeUus Aristides (a.d. 117-187), 
described it in terms that reveal the splendor of these Roman-Hellenistic cities. 

Go from east to west, and you will pass from temple to temple 
and from hill to hill along a street fairer than its name (the Golden 
Way). Stand on the acropolis: the sea flows beneath you, the suburbs 
lie about you, the city through three lovely views fills the goblet of 
your soul. . , . Everything to the very shore is a shining mass of 
gymnasia, markets, theaters . . . baths— so many that you hardly 
know where to bathe . . . fountains and public walks, and running 
water in every home. The abundance of her spectacles, contests, and 
exnibitions is beyond telling, and the variety of her handicrafts. 

Of all cities this is best suited for those who like to live at ease and 
be philosophers without guile.®® 

Aelius was one of many rhetors and sophists whose fame drew students to 
Smyrna from all Hellas. His teacher Polemo was so great (says Philostratus) 
“that he talked with cities as his inferiors, with emperors as not his superiors, 
and with the gods as his equals.” When he lectured in Athens Herodes Atticus, 
his greatest rival in opulent eloquence, attended as an admiring pupil. In payment 
for the privilege Herodes sent him 150 000 drachmas ($90,000); when Polemo 
failed to thank him a friend suggested that he felt underpaid; Herodes sent 
100,000 more, which Polemo quietly accepted as his due. Polemo used his for- 
tune to embellish his adopted city; he took part in its government, harmonized 
its factions, and served it as ambassador. Tradition says that finding his arthritis 



5i6 CAESAR AND CHRIST (CHAP. XXIV 

unbearable he shut himself up in the tomb of his ancestors at Laodicea and died 
of voluntary starvation at the age of fifty-six.®^ 

Sardis, Croesus’ ancient capital, was still “a great city” in Strabo’s time. Cicero 
was impressed by the splendor and refinement of Mytilene, and in the third cen- 
tury Longus described it in terms suggestive of Venice.®® Pergamum shone with 
the great altar and costly buildings raised by the Attalid kings out of a treasury 
fattened by the labor of slaves in state forests, fields, mines, and factories. Attains 
III anticipated Roman expansion and social revolution by bequeathing his realm 
to Rome in 133 b.c. Aristonicus, son of King Eumenes II by a concubine, de- 
nounced the bequest as forced, called the slaves and the free poor to revolt, 
defeated a Roman army (132), captured many cities, and planned a socialist 
state with the help of Blossius, teacher of the Gracchi. The neighboring kings 
of Bithynia and Pontus, and the business classes of the occupied cities, joined 
Rome in suppressing the rebellion, and Aristonicus died in a Roman dungeon. 
This uprising, and the Mithridatic Wars, interrupted the cultural life of 
Pergamum for half a century, and Antony despoiled its famous library to re- 
imburse Alexandria for the volumes burned during Caesar’s stay. Pergamum 
must have recovered by Vespasian’s time, for the elder Pliny judged it the most 
brilliant city in Asia. It enjoyed a new' flurry of building under the Antonines, 
and developed in its Asclepieum a medical school from which Galen went forth 
to cure the world. 

Farther north Alexandria Troas was made a Roman colony by Augustus in 
memory of Rome’s supposed Trojan origin— which gave Rome a convenient 
claim to all these parts. On a near-by hill (Hissarlik) old Troy was rebuilt as 
new Ilium, and became a goal for tourists to whom guides pointed out the exact 
spot of every exploit in the Iliad, and the cave where Paris had judged Hera, 
Aphrodite, and Athena. On the Propontis Cyzicus built ships and sent out a 
ubiquitous merchant fleet rivaled only by that of Rhodes. Here Hadrian built 
a Temple of Persephone w hich was one of the glories of Asia. Its columns, says 
Dio Cassius, were six feet in diameter and sev'enty-five feet high, yet each w'as 
a single block of stone.®^ Rising from a hill, it towered so high that Aelius counted 
the harbor’s lighthouse superfluous. 

From the Red to the Black Sea a hundred cities flourished under the Roman 


VII. THE GREAT MITHRIDATES 

Along the northern shores of Asia Minor sprawled Bithynia and Pontus, 
mountainous in the interior, but rich in timber and minerals. Here a mixture 
of Thracians, Greeks, and Iranians overlay an antique Hittite stock. A line 
of Greco-Thracian kings ruled Bithynia, built a capital at Nicomedia 
(Is-nikmid), and major cities at Prusa and Nicaea (Is-nik). About 302 b.c. 



CHAP. XXIV) THE HELLENISTIC REVIVAL 5*7 

a Persian noble, piously called Mithridates, carved a kingdom for himself 
out of Cappadocia and Pontus, and founded a dynasty of virile Hellenizing 
monarchs, with capitals at Comana Pontica and Sinope. Their rule spread 
until it impinged upon Roman economic and political interests. The result- 
ing Alithridatic W ars are fitly named from the redoubtable king who united 
western Asia and European Greece in a revolt which, if it had succeeded, 
would have changed the face of history. 

Mithridates VI had inherited the throne of Pontus as a boy of eleven. His 
mother and his guardians, seeking to supplant him, tried to kill him. He fled 
from the palace, disguised himself, and for seven years lived in the woods as 
a hunter, dressed in skins. About 1 1 5 b.c. a coup d’etat deposed his mother 
and restored him to power. Surrounded by the conspiracies characteristic of 
Oriental courts, he took the precaution of drinking a little poison every 
day, until he had developed immunity to most of the varieties available to 
his intimates. In the course of his experiments he discovered many antidotes. 
From these his interest spread to medicine, on which he compiled data of 
such value that Pompey had them translated into Latin. His wild and exact- 
ing life had given him strength of body as well as of will; he grew to so 
large a frame that he sent his suit of armor to Delphi to amuse the worshipers. 
He was an expert horseman and warrior, could (we are assured) run fast 
enough to overtake a deer, drove a sLxteen-horse chariot, and rode 120 miles 
in a day.®® He prided himself on being able to outeat and outdrink any man, 
and he attended to a numerous harem. Roman historians tell us that he was 
cruel and treacherous and slew his mother, his brother, three sons, and three 
daughters; but Rome has not transmitted his side of this tale. He was a 
man of some culture, could speak twenty-two languages, and never used an 
interpreter; he studied Greek literature, was fond of Greek music, en- 
riched Greek temples, and had Greek scholars, poets, and philosophers at his 
court; he collected works of art and issued coins of surpassing excellence. 
But he shared in the sensuality and coarseness of his half -barbarian environ- 
ment and accepted the superstitions of his time. He defended himself against 
Rome not with the far-seeing maneuvers of a great general or statesman, 
but with the impromptu courage of an animal at bay. 

Such a man could not be content with the reduced kingdom relinquished 
by his mother. With the help of Greek officers and mercenaries he con- 
quered Armenia and the Caucasus, passed over the Kuban River and the 
Strait of Kerch into the Crimea, and brought under his sway all the Greek 
cities on the east, north, and west coast of the Black Sea. As the collapse of 
Greek military power had left these communities almost defenseless against 
the barbarians of their hinterland, they received the Greek phalanxes of 



CAESAR AND CHRIST 


518 


(chap. XXIV 


Mithridates as saviors. The subject cities included Sinope (Sinob), Trapezus 
(Trebizond), Panticapaeum (Kerch), and Byzantium; but Bithynian con- 
trol of the Hellespont (Dardanelles) left the Mediterranean commerce of 
Pontus at the mercy of hostile kings. When Nicomedes II of Bithynia died 
(94 B.C.), his two sons contested the succession. One of them sought the 
aid of Rome, the other, Socrates, appealed to the Pontic king. Mithridates 
took advantage of the factional strife in Italy to invade Bithynia and en- 
throne Socrates. Rome, unwilling to see the Bosporus in hostile hands, 
ordered Mithridates and Socrates out of Bithynia. Mithridates complied, 
Socrates refused. The Roman governor of Asia deposed him and crowned 
Nicomedes III. The new ruler, encouraged by the Roman proconsul Manius 
Aquilius, invaded Pontus, and the First Mithridatic War began (88-84 b-c.). 

Mithridates felt that his sole chance of survival lay in arousing the 
Hellenic East to revolt against its Italian overlords. He announced himself 
as the hberator of Hellas and sent troops to free the Greek cities of Asia, if 
necessary by force. Opposed by the business classes of the towns, he courted 
the democratic parties with promises of semisocialistic reforms. Meanwhile 
his navy of 400 ships destroyed the Roman Black Sea fleet, and his army of 
290,000 men overwhelmed the forces of Nicomedes and Aquilius. To ex- 
press his scorn of Roman avarice,®® the victorious king poured molten gold 
down the throat of the captured Aquilius— fresh from his triumph over the 
revolted slaves of Sicily. The Greek cities of Asia Minor, shorn of Roman 
defense, opened their gates to the armies of Mithridates and declared their 
allegiance to his cause. At his suggestion, on an appointed day, they slew 
all Italians— 80,000 men, women, and children— whom they found within 
their walls (88 b.c.). Says Appian: 


The Ephesians tore away the fugitives who had taken refuge in 
the Temple of Artemis and were clasping the images of the goddess, 
and slew them. The Pergamenes shot with arrows the Romans who 
had sought sanctuary in the Temple of Aesculapius. The people of 
Adramyttium followed into the sea those who sought to escape by 
swimming, and killed them and drowned their children. The in- 
habitants of Caunus (in Caria) pursued the Italians who had taken 
refuge about the statue of Vesta, killed the children before their 
mothers’ eyes, then the mothers, then the men. ... By which it was 
made plain that it was as much hatred of the Romans as fear of Mith- 
ridates that impelled these atrocities.®® 

Doubtless the poorer classes, who had borne the brunt of Roman domina- 
tion, took the lead in this mad massacre; the propertied classes, long pro- 
tected by Rome, must have trembled at so wild an uprising of revenge. 



CHAP.XXIV) THE HELLENISTIC REVIVAL 519 

Mithridates sought to appease the well to do by exempting the Greek cities 
from taxes for five years and giving them complete home rule. At the same 
time, however, he “proclaimed the canceling of debts,” says Appian,'^“ “freed 
the slaves, confiscated many estates, and redistributed the land.” Leading 
men in the communities formed a conspiracy against him; he discovered it 
and had 1600 of them killed. The lower classes, aided by philosophers and 
university professors,'^ seized power in many Greek cities, even in Athens 
and Sparta, and declared war against both Rome and wealth. The Greeks 
of Delos, in an ecstasy of freedom, slaughtered 20,000 Italians in one day. 
The fleet of Mithridates captured the Cyclades, and his armies took posses- 
sion of Euboea, Thessaly, Macedonia, and Thrace. The defection of rich 
“Asia” stopped the flow of tribute to the Roman treasury and of interest to 
Roman investors, and plunged Italy into a financial crisis that had something 
to do with the revolutionary movement of Satuminus and Cinna. Italy itself 
was divided, for the Samnites and Lucanians sent offers of alliance to the 
Pontic king. 

Faced with war and revolution everywhere, the Senate sold the accumu- 
lated gold and silver of Rome’s temples to finance Sulla’s troops. We must 
not tell again how Sulla captured Athens, defeated the rebel armies, saved 
the Empire for Rome, and gave Adithridates a lenient peace. The King 
withdrew to his Pontic capital and quietly organized another army and 
fleet. Murena, the Roman legate in Asia, decided to attack him before he 
grew stronger. When, in this Second Mithridatic War (83-81), Murena 
was defeated, Sulla reprimanded him for violating the treaty and ordered 
hostilities ended. Six years later Nicomedes III bequeathed Bithvnia to 
Rome. Mithridates realized that his own kingdom would soon be swallowed 
up if the Roman power, already controlling the Bosporus, should reach the 
borders of Paphlagonia and Pontus. In the Third Mithridatic War (75-63) 
he made a last effort, fought for twelve years against Lucullus and Pompey, 
was betrayed by his allies and aides, and fled to the Crimea. There the old 
warrior, now in his sLxty-ninth year, tried to organize an army to cross the 
Balkans and invade Italy from the north. His son Phamaces revolted against 
his authority, his army refused the venture, and the deserted king tried to 
kill himself. The poison that he took failed to work because he had inured 
his system to it, and his hands were too weak to press home the blade from 
whose point he invited death. His friends and proteges, commissioned by 
his son to kill him, ended his life with their swords and spears. 



520 


CAESAR AND CHRIST 


(chap. XXIV 


VIII. PROSE 

It speaks well for Roman rule that the cities of Asia Minor recovered so 
rapidly from the intermittent fever of these wars. Nicomedia became the 
capital of the province of Bithynia-Pontus and later the imperial seat of 
Diocletian; Nicaea would be immortalized by the most important council 
in the history of the Christian Church. The two cities so rivaled one another 
in building that Trajan had to send the younger Pliny to draw them back 
from bankruptcy. Nicomedia made her offering to literature in Flavius 
Arrianus, whom we have seen recording the discourses of Epictetus. 
Governor of Cappadocia for six years, archon of Athens for one, Arrian yet 
found time to write many histories, of which only the Anabasis of Alex- 
ander remains, with an appendix of Indica. It was written in clear and simple 
Greek, for Arrian took Xenophon as his exemplar in style as well as life. 
“This work,” he says, with the bold vanity of the ancients, “is, and has been 
from my youth up, equivalent to native land, and family, and public office 
for me; and therefore I do not deem myself unworthy to rank among the 
greatest authors in the Greek language.” 

Other cities along the Black Sea had goodly buildings and famous scholars. 
Myrlea had 320,000 inhabitants;’^® Amastris (Amasra) impressed P lin y as 
“a neat and lovely city,” known for its fine box trees; Sinope flourished as 
a fishing center and an outlet for the timber and minerals of its countryside; 
Amisus (Samsun) and Trapezus made a living by trading across the waters 
with Scythia (southern Russia); and Amasea (Amasia) gave birth and a 
home to antiquity’s most celebrated geographer. 

Strabo came of a rich family, related, he assures us, to the Pontic kings. 
He suffered from a peculiar squint still known by his name.’^ He traveled 
extensively, apparently on diplomatic missions, and used every opportunity 
to gather geographical or historical information. He wrote a lost history con- 
tinuing Polybius; and in 7 b.c. he issued his great Geography, of whose 
seventeen books time has preserved nearly aU. Like Arrian he begins by pro- 
claiming the virtues of his work: 

I ask pardon of my readers, and appeal to them not to fasten the 
blame for the length of my discussion upon me rather than upon those 
who earnestly desire knowledge of things famous and ancient. 

In this work I must leave untouched what is small, and devote my 
attention to what is noble and great . . . useful or memorable or 
entertaining. And just as, in judging the merits of colossal statues, 
we do not examine each individual part with minute care, but rather 



CHAP. XXIV) THE HELLENISTIC REVIVAL 5^1 

consider the general effect ... so should this my book be judged. 

For it, too, is a colossal work . . . worthy of a philosopher.'^® 

He borrows frankly from Polybius and Poseidonius, less frankly from 
Eratosthenes, brings them all sharply to account for their errors, and sug- 
gests that his own should be blamed on his sources.'^® But he acknowledges 
his sources with rare candor and usually selects them with discrimination. 
He notes that the extension of the Roman Empire has widened geographical 
knowledge, but believes that there are whole continents still unknown— 
possibly in the Atlantic. He beheves that the earth is spheroidal (but the 
word probably meant spherical), and that if one were to sail westward from 
Spain he would in time come to India. He describes coastlines as always 
changing through erosion or eruption and conjectures that subterranean 
disturbances may someday sever Suez and unite the seas. His work was a 
brave summary of the global knowledge of his age and must be ranked as 
one of the major achievements of ancient science. 

Far more renowned than Strabo in his time was Dio Chrysostom— Dio of 
the Golden Mouth (a.d. 40-120). His family had long been distinguished 
in Prusa; his grandfather had exhausted a fortune in gifts to the Bithynian 
city and then had made another; his father had gone through the same 
experience; and Dio followed in their steps.'^^ He became an orator and a 
sophist, went to Rome, was converted to Stoicism by Musonius Rufus, and 
was banished from Italy and Bithynia by Domitian (82) . Forbidden the use 
of his property or income, he wandered for thirteen years from country to 
country as a penniless philosopher, refusing money for his discourses, and 
earning his bread for the most part by the work of his hands. When Domitian 
was succeeded by Nerva, Dio’s exile was changed into honors; Nerva and 
Trajan befriended him and gave his city many favors at his request. He 
returned to Prusa and devoted most of his wealth to beautifying it. Another 
philosopher accused him of embezzling public funds; he was tried by PHny 
and appears to have been exonerated. 

Dio left behind him eighty orations. For us today they contain more wind 
than meat; they suffer from empty amplification, deceptive analogies, and 
rhetorical tricks; they stretch half an idea to half a hundred pages; no wonder 
a weary listener complained, “You are letting the sun go down with your 
interminable questions.” But the man had charm and eloquence, else he 
could hardly have become the most celebrated orator of the century, for 
whose speeches men would interrupt a war. “I don’t know what you mean,” 
said the honest Trajan, “but I love you as myself.” The barbarians on the 
Borysthenes (Dnieper) heard him as gladly as the Greeks gathered at Olym- 
pia, or the excitable Alexandrians; an army about to revolt against Nerva was 



CAESAR AND CHRIST 


522 


(chap. XXIV 


mollified into acceptance by the impromptu address of the half-naked exile. 

Probably what drew people to him was not his fine Attic Greek, but the 
courage of his denunciations. Almost alone in pagan antiquity he condemned 
prostitution; and few writers of his time so openly attacked the institution of 
slavery. (He was a bit vexed, however, when he found that his slaves had 
run away.)*® His address to the Alexandrians was a castigation of their lux- 
ury, superstition, and vice. He chose Ihum as the scene of an oration in 
which he argued that Troy had never existed and that “Homer was the 
boldest har in history.” In the heart of Rome he expounded the case of the 
countryside against the city, painted in vivid narrative a touching picture of 
rural poverty, and warned his audience that the land was being neglected and 
the agricultural basis of civUization was in decay. At Olympia, amid a multi- 
tude of fanatical worldhngs, he reproved the atheists and epicureans of the 
day. Though popular conceptions of deity may be absurd, said Dio, the wise 
man will understand that the simple mind needs simple ideas and pictorial 
symbols. In truth no man can conceive the form of the Supreme Being, and 
even Pheidias’ noble statue was an anthropomorphic assumption as unwar- 
rantable as the primitive identification of God with a star or a tree. We can- 
not know what God is, but we have an innate conviction that he exists, and 
we feel that philosophy without rehgion is a dark and hopeless thing. The 
only real freedom is wisdom— i.e., the knowledge of what is right and what 
is wrong; the road to freedom lies not through politics or revolution, but 
through philosophy; and true philosophy consists not in the speculations of 
books, but in the faithful practice of honor and virtue according to the dic- 
tates of that inmost voice which is, in some mystic sense, the word of God in 
the heart of man.*^ 


IX. THE ORIENTAL TIDE 

Religion, which had bided its time and nourished its roots through all the 
learned or ribald skepticism of the Periclean and Hellenistic periods, now in 
the second century resumed its immemorial sway as philosophy, baffled by 
infinity and human hope, confessed its limitations and abdicated its author- 
ity. The people themselves had never lost their faith; most of them accepted 
in outhne the Homeric description of the afterhfe,®^ sacrificed rehgiously 
before undertaking a voyage, and still placed an obol in the mouth of the 
dead to pay his passage across the Styx. Roman statecraft welcomed the aid of 
estabhshed priesthoods and sought popular support by building costly tem- 
ples to local gods. Throughout Palestine, Syria, and Asia Minor, the wealth 
of the clergy continued to grow. Hadad and Atargatis were still worshiped 
by the Syrians and had an awesome shrine at Hicrapohs; the resurrection of 



THE HELLENISTIC REVIVAL 


523 


CHAP. XXIV) 

the god Tammuz was still hailed in the towns of Syria with the cry, “Adonis 
[i.e., the Lord] is risen,” and his ascension into heaven was celebrated in the 
closing scenes of his festival.®^ Similar ceremonies commemorated in Greek 
ritual the agony, death, and resurrection of Dionysus. From Cappadocia the 
worship of the goddess Ma had spread into Ionia and Italy; her priests 
(called -fanatici as belonging to the ]anum, or temple) danced dizzily to the 
sound of trumpets and drums, slashed themselves with knives, and sprinkled 
the goddess and her devotees with their blood.®* The making of new deities 
went on assiduously; Caesar and the emperors, Antinous and many local 
worthies, were deified (i.e., canonized) in life or death. Cross-fertilized by 
trade and war, pantheons were everywhere in flower, and prayers rose hope- 
fully in a thousand tongues to a thousand gods. Paganism was not one re- 
ligion; it was a jungle of rival creeds, often merging in eclectic confusion. 

The worship of Cybele held its ground in Lydia and Phrygia, Italy and 
Africa and elsewhere, and its priests, as before, emasculated themselves in 
imitation of her beloved Attis. At her spring festival her worshipers fasted, 
prayed, and mourned the death of Attis; her priests cut their arms and drank 
their own blood; and a solemn procession bore the young god to his grave. 
But on the morrow the streets rang with exultant shouts as the people cele- 
brated the resurrection of Attis and the renewal of the earth. “Take courage, 
O mystics,” cried the priests, “the god is saved; and for you also will come 
salvation.” On the last day of the feast the image of the Great Mother was 
carried in triumph through crowds that hailed her, at Rome, as Nostra 
Dovtma, “Our Lady.” 

Even more widely honored than Cybele was the Egyptian goddess Isis, 
the sorrowing mother, the loving comforter, the bearer of the gift of eternal 
life. All the Mediterranean peoples knew how her great spouse Osiris had 
died and had risen from the dead; in nearly every great city on that historic 
sea this happy resurrection was commemorated with gorgeous pageantry, 
and jubilant worshipers sang, “We have found Osiris again.” ®’’ Isis was 
represented in pictures and statues as holding her divine child Horus in her 
arms, and devout litanies hailed her as “Queen of Heaven,” “Star of the 
Sea,” and “Mother of God.” ®® Of all pagan cults this came nearest to Chris- 
tianity in the tenderness of its story, the refinement of its ritual, the solemnity 
and yet joyful atmosphere of its chapels, the moving music of its vespers, 
the conscientious minis try of its white-robed and tonsured priests,®® the 
honors and opportunities with which it charmed and comforted women, the 
universal welcome it gave to every nationahty and every class. The religion 
of Isis spread from Egypt to Greece in the fourth century b.c., to Sicily in 
the third, to Italy in the second, and then to all parts of the Empire; her icons 
have been found on the Danube, the Rhine, and the Seine, and a temple to 



> CAESAR AND CHRIST 


524 


(chap. XXIV 


her has been unearthed in London.®** The Mediterranean soul has never 
ceased to worship the divine creativeness and maternal solicitude of woman. 

Meanwhile the masculine cult of Mithras was passing fropi Persia to the 
most distant Roman frontiers. In the later Zoroastrian theology Mithras was 
the son of Ahura-Mazda, the God of Light. He, too, was the god of light, of 
truth, purity, and honor; sometimes he was identified with the sun and led 
the cosmic war against the powers of darkness, always he mediated between 
his father and his followers, protecting and encouraging them in fife’s 
struggle with evil, lies, uncleanliness, and the other works of Ahriman, 
Prince of Darkness. When Pompey’s soldiers brought this religion from 
Cappadocia to Europe a Greek artist pictured Mithras as kneeling on the 
back of a bull and plunging a poniard into its neck; this representation be- 
came the universal symbol of the faith. The seventh day of each week was 
held sacred to the sun-god; and towards the end of December his followers 
celebrated the birthday of Mithras “the Invincible Sun,” who, at the winter 
solstice, had won his annual victory over the forces of darkness, and day by 
day would now give longer light.®^ Tertullian speaks of a Mithraic priest- 
hood with a “high pontiff,” and of celibates and virgins serving the god; 
daily sacrifice was offered at his altar, worshipers partook of consecrated 
bread and wine, and the climax of the ceremony was signaled by the sound- 
ing of a bell.®^ A flame was kept ever burning before the crypt in which the 
young god was represented felling the bull. Mithraism preached a high 
morality and pledged its “soldiers” to a lifelong war against evil in every 
form. After death, said its priests, all men must appear before the judgment 
seat of Mithras; then unclean souls would be handed over to Ahriman for 
eternal torment, while the pure would rise through seven spheres, shedding 
some mortal element at each stage, until they would be received into the full 
radiance of heaven by Ahura-Alazda himself.®® This invigorating mythology 
spread in the second and third centuries of our era throtii^h western Asia 
and Europe (skipping Greece), and built its chapels as far north as Hadrian’s 
Wall. Christian Eathers were shocked to find so many parallels between their 
own religion and Alithraism; they argued that these were thefts from Chris- 
tianity, or confusing stratagems of Satan (a form of Ahriman) . It is difficult 
to say which faith borrowed from the other; perhaps both absorbed ideas 
current in the religious air of the East. 

Each of the great cults of the Mediterranean region had “mysteries,” 
which were usually ceremonies of purification, sacrifice, initiation, revela- 
tion, and regeneration, centering about the death and resurrection of the 
god. New members were admitted into the worship of Cybele by being 
placed naked in a pit over which a bull was slain; the blood of the sacrificed 
animal, falling upon the candidate, purified him of sin and gave him a new 



CHAP.XXIV) THE HELLENISTIC REVIVAL 5^5 

spiritual and eternal life. The genitals of the bull, representing his sacred fer- 
tility, were placed in a consecrated vessel and were dedicated to the god- 
dess.®^ Mithraism had a similar rite, known to the classic world as the tmro- 
bolhim, or throwing of the bull. Apuleius described in ecstatic terms the 
degrees of initiation into the service of Isis— the long novitiate of fasting, 
continence, and prayer, the purifying submersion in holy water, and at last 
the mystic vision of the goddess olfering everlasting bliss. At Eleusis the 
candidate was required to confess his sins (which discouraged Nero) , ab- 
stain for a time from certain foods, bathe in the bay for spiritual as well as 
physical cleansing, and then offer sacrifice, usually of a pig. For three days, 
at the Feast of Demeter, the initiates mourned with her the snatching of her 
daughter into Hades, and meanwhile lived on consecrated cakes and a mystic 
mixture of flour, water, and mint. On the third night a religious drama 
represented the resurrection of Persephone, and the officiating priest prom- 
ised a like rebirth to every purified soul.®“ Varying the theme under Flindu 
or Pythagorean influence, the Orphic sect throughout Greek lands taught 
that the soul is imprisoned in a succession of sinful bodies and can be released 
from this degrading reincarnation by rising to ecstatic union with Dionysus. 
At their gatherings the members of the Orphic brotherhood drank the blood 
of a bull sacrificed to~and identified with— the dying and atoning savior. 
Communal partaking of sacred food or drink was a frequent feature of these 
Mediterranean faiths. Often the food was thought to take on, by sanctifica- 
tion, the powers of the god, which were then magically conveyed to the 
communicant.®® 

All sects assumed the possibility of magic. The Magi had disseminated 
their art through the East and had given a new name to old jugglery. The 
Mediterranean world was rich in magicians, miracleworkers, oracles, astrol- 
ogers, ascetic saints, and scientific interpreters of dreams. Every unusual oc- 
currence was widely hailed as a divine portent of future events. Askesis, 
which the Greeks had used to denote the athletic training of the body, came 
now to mean the spiritual taming of the flesh; men scourged themselves, 
mutilated themselves, starved themselves, or bound themselves to one place 
with chains; some of them died through self-torture or self-denial.®'^ In the 
Egyptian desert near Lake Mareotis a group of Jews and non-Jews, male 
and female, lived in solitary cells, avoided sexual relations, met on the Sabbath 
for common prayer, and called themselves Therapeutae, healers of the 
soul.®* Millions believed that the writings ascribed to Orpheus, Hermes, 
Pythagoras, the sibyls, etc., had been dictated or inspired by a god. Preachers 
claiming divine inspiration traveled from city to city, performing apparently 
miraculous cures. Alexander of Abonoteichus trained a serpent to hide its 
head under his arm and allow a half-human mask to be affixed to its tail; he 



CAESAR AND CHRIST 


526 


(chap. XXIV 


announced that the serpent was the god Asclepius come to earth to serve 
as an oracle; and he amassed a fortune by interpreting the sounds made by 
reeds inserted in the false head.®® 

Beside such charlatans there were probably thousands of sincere preachers 
of the pagan faiths. Early in the third century Philostratus painted an ideal- 
ized picture of such a man in his Life of Apollonius of Tyana. At sixteen 
Apollonius adopted the strict rule of the Pythagorean brotherhood, renounc- 
ing marriage, meat, and wine, never shaving his beard, and keeping silence for 
five years.“® He distributed his patrimony among his relatives and wandered 
as a penniless monk through Persia, India, Egypt, western Asia, Greece, and 
Italy. He imbibed the lore of the Magi, the Brahmans, and the Egyptian 
ascetics. He visited temples of any creed, implored the priests to abandon 
the sacrifice of animals, worshiped the sun, accepted the gods, and taught 
that behind them there was one supreme unknowable deity. His life of abne- 
gation and piety led his followers to claim that he was the son of a god, but 
he described himself simply as the son of Apollonius. Tradition credited him 
with many miracles; he walked through closed doors, understood all 
languages, cast out demons, and raised a girl from the dead.^®^ But he was a 
philosopher rather than a magician. He knew and loved Greek literature and 
expounded a simple but exacting morality. “Grant me,” he prayed the gods, 
“to have little and to desire nothing.” Asked by a king to choose a gift, he 
answered, “Dried fruit and bread.” Preaching reincarnation, he bade his 
followers injure no living creature and eat no flesh. He exhorted them to 
shun enmity, slander, jealousy, and hatred; “if we are philosophers,” he told 
them, “we cannot hate our fellow men.” “Sometimes,” says Philostratus, 
“he discussed communism and taught that men ought to support one an- 
other.” He was accused of sedition and witchcraft, came of his own accord 
to Rome to answer these charges before Domitian, was imprisoned, and 
escaped. He died about a.d. 98, at an advanced age. His followers claimed 
that he had appeared to them after his death and had then ascended bodily 
into heaven.^®® 

What were the qualities that won half of Rome, half the Empire, to these 
new faiths? Partly their classless, raceless character; they accepted all na- 
tionalities, all freemen, and all slaves, and rode with consoling indifference 
over inequalities of pedigree and wealth. Their temples were made spacious 
to welcome the people as well as to enshrine the god. Cybele and Isis were 
mother-goddesses acquainted with grief, who mourned like millions of 
bereaved women; they could understand what the Roman deities seldom 
knew-the emptied hearts of the defeated. The desire to return tc the mother 
is stronger than the impulse to depend upon the father; it is the mother 
name that comes spontaneously to the lips in great joy or distress; therefore 



CHAP.XXIV) THE HELLENISTIC REVIVAL 527 

men as well as women found comfort and refuge in Isis and Cybele. Even 
today the Mediterranean worshiper appeals more often to Mary than to the 
Father or the Son; and the lovely prayer that he most frequently repeats is 
addressed not to the Virgin hut to the Mother, blessed in the fruit of her 
womb. 

The new faiths not only entered more deeply into the heart; they appealed 
more colorfully to the imagmation and the senses with processions and 
chants alternating between sorrow and rejoicing, and a ritual of impressive 
symbolism that brought fresh courage to spirits heavy with the prose of 
hfe. The new priesthoods were filled not by pohticians occasionally don- 
ning sacerdotal garb, but by men and women of all ranks, graduating 
through an ascetic novitiate to continual ministration. By their help the soul 
conscious of wrongdoing could be purified; sometimes the body racked with 
illness could be healed by an inspiring word or ritual; and the mysteries at 
which they officiated symbohzed the hope that even death might be over- 
come. 

Once men had sublimated their longing for grandeur and continuance in 
the glory and survival of their family and their clan, and then of a state that 
was their creation and collective self. Now the old clan lines were melting 
away in the new mobility of peace; and the imperial state was the spiritual 
embodiment only of the master class, not of the powerless multitude of men. 
Monarchy at the top, frustrating the participation and merger of the citizen 
in the state, produced individualism at the bottom and through the mass. 
The promise of personal immortality, of an endless happiness after a life of 
subjection, poverty, tribulation, or toil, was the final and irresistible attrac- 
tion of the Oriental faiths and of the Christianity that summarized, absorbed, 
and conquered them. All the world seemed conspiring to prepare the way 
for Christ. 



CHAPTER XXV 


Rome and Judea 

132 B.C.-4B.C. 


I. PARTHIA 

B etween Pontus and the Caucasus rose the troubled mountains of 
Armenia, on whose crest, stoiy told, Noah’s ark had found a mooring. 
Through the fertile valleys ran the roads that led from Parthia and Mesopotamia 
to the Black Sea; hence* empires competed for Armenia. The people were Indo- 
European, akin to the Hittites and the Phrygians, but they had never surrendered 
their sweeping Anatolian nose. They were a vigorous race, patient in agricul- 
ture, skilled in handicraft, unequaled in commercial acumen; they made the best 
of a difficult terrain and raised enough wealth to keep their kings in luxury if 
not in power. Darius I, in the Behistun inscription (521 b.c.), named Armenia 
among the satrapies of Persia; later it gave a nominal allegiance to the Seleucids 
and then alternately to Parthia and Rome; but its remoteness allowed it a prac- 
tical independence. Its most famous king, Tirgranes the Great (94-56 b.c.), 
conquered Cappadocia, added a second capital, Triganocerta, to Artaxata, and 
joined Mithridates’ revolt against Rome. When Pompey accepted his apologies 
he gave the victorious general 6000 talents ($21,600,000), io,ooo drachmas 
($6000) to each centurion, and fifty to each soldier, in the Roman army.^ Under 
Caesar, Augustus, and Nero Armenia acknowledged the suzerainty of Rome, 
and under Trajan it was for a time a Roman province; nevertheless, its culture 
was Iranian, and its usual orientation was toward Parthia. 

The Parthians had for centuries occupied the region south of the Caspian Sea 
as subjects of the Achaemenid, then of the Seleucid, kings. They were of 
Scythian-Turanian stock— i.e., they belonged racially with the peoples of south- 
ern Russia and Turkestan. About 248 b.c. a Scythian chief, Arsaces, revolted 
against the Seleucid authority, made Parthia a sovereign state, and established 
the Arsacid dynasty. The Seleucid kings, weakened by Rome’s defeat of Anti- 
ochus III (189 B.C.), were unable to defend their territory against the reckless, 
half-barbarous Parthians, and by the end of the second century b.c. all Meso- 
potamia and Persia were absorbed into a new Parthian Empire. Three capitals, 
according to the season, entertained the new royalty: Hecatompylus in Parthia, 
Ecbatana in Media, and Ctesiphon on the lower Tigris. Across from Ctesiphon 
lay the former Seleucid capital Seleucia, which remained for centuries a Greek 
city in a Parthian realm. The Arsacid rulers kept the administrative structure 

528 



ROME AND JUDEA 


CHAP. XXV) 


529 


built up by the Seleucids, but overlaid it with a feudalism derived from the 
Achaemenid kings. The mass of the population was composed of agricultural 
serfs and slaves; industry was backward, but the Parthian ironworkers made a 
fine steel, and “the brewing trade was highly profitable.” ^ The wealth of the 
state came partly from the trade that passed along the great rivers, partly from 
the caravans that crossed Parthia on the way between farther Asia and the West. 
From 53 B.C., when the Parthians defeated Crassus at Carrhae, to a.d. 217, when 
Alacrinus bought peace from Artabanus, Rome fought war after war for the 
control of these routes and the Red Sea. 

The Parthians were too rich or too poor to indulge in literature. The aristo- 
crats, as in all ages, preferred the art of life to the life of art, and the serfs were 
too illiterate, the artisans too busy, the merchants too commercial, to produce 
great art or great books. The people spoke Pahlavi and wrote in Aramaic on 
parchment, which now replaced cuneiform; but not a line of Parthian literature 
has been preserved. We know that Greek plays were enjoyed in Ctesiphon as 
well as in Seleucia, for the head of Crassus played a part there in the Bacchae 
of Euripides. The paintings and sculptures discovered at Palmyra, Dura-Europus, 
and Ashur were probably the work of Iranian artists; their crude amalgam of 
Greek and Oriental styles affected later art from China to Byzantium. A vivid 
relief of a mounted archer has come down to us to suggest that we might have 
a higher opinion of Parthian art if more of it remained.-® At Hatra, near Mosul, 
an Arabian feudatory of the Parthian king built (88 b.c.?) a limestone palace of 
seven arched and va^ted halls, in a powerful but barbarous style. Good Parthian 
work has survived in engraved silverware and jewelry. 

The Parthians excelled in man’s favorite art— personal adornment. Both sexes 
curled their hair; the men nursed frizzed beards and flowing mustaches, and 
clothed themselves in tunic and baggy trousers, usually covered with a many- 
colored robe; the women swathed themselves in delicate embroideries and 
decked their hair with flowers. Free Parthians amused themselves with hunting, 
ate and drank abundantly, and never went on foot when they could ride. They 
were brave warriors and honorable foes, treated prisoners decentlv, admitted 
foreigners to high office, and gave asylum to refugees; sometimes, however, 
they mutilated dead enemies, tortured witnesses, and corrected trifling offenses 
with the scourge. They practiced polygamy according to their means, veiled 
and secluded their women, severely punished the infidelity of their wives, but 
permitted divorce to either sex almost at will.® When the Parthian general Surena 
led an army against Crassus he took with him 200 concubines and a thousand 
camels for his baggage.^ All in all the Parthians impress us as less civilized than 
the Achaemenid Persians and more honorable gentlemen than the Romans. They 
were tolerant of religious diversities, allowing the Greeks, Jews, and Christians 
among them to practice their rituals unhindered. They themselves, veering from 
Zoroastrian orthodoxy, worshiped the sun and the moon, and preferred Alithras 
to Ahura-Alazda, much as the Christians preferred Christ to Yahveh. The A'lagi, 
neglected by the later Arsacid kings, abetted the overthrow of the dynasty. 



CAESAR AND CHRIST 


530 


(chap. XXV 


On the death of Vologases IV (a.d. 209) his sons Vologases V and Artabanus IV 
fought for, the throne. Artabanus won, and then defeated the Romans at Nisibis. 
Three centuries of war between the empires ended in a modified victory for 
Parthia; on the Mesopotamian plains the Roman legions were at a disadvantage 
against the Part hian cavalry. Artabanus in turn fell in civil war. His conqueror, 
Ardashir or Artaxerxes, feudal lord of Persia, made himself King of Kings 
(a.d. 227) and established the Sassanid dynasty. The Zoroastrian religion was 
restored, and Persia entered upon a greater age. 


H. THE HASMONEANS 

In 143 B.c. Simon Maccabee, taking advantage of the struggles among the 
Parthians, Seleucids, Egyptians, and Romans, wrested the independence of 
Judea from the Seleucid king. A popular assembly named him general and 
high priest of the Second Jewish Commonwealth ( 1 42 b . c - a . d . 70) , and made 
the latter office hereditary in his Hasmonean family. Judea became again a 
theocracy, under the Hasmonean dynasty of priest-kings. It has been a 
characteristic of Semitic societies that they closely associated the spiritual 
and temporal powers, in the family and in the state; they would have no 
sovereign but God. 

Recognizing the weakness of the little kingdom, the Hasmoneans spent 
two generations widening its borders by diplomacy and force. By 78 b.c. 
they had conquered and absorbed Samaria, Edom, Moab, Galilee, Idumea, 
Transjordania, Gadara, Pella, Gerasa, Raphia, and Gaza, and had made Pales- 
tine as extensive as under Solomon. The descendants of those brave Mac- 
cabees who had fought for religious freedom enforced Judaism and circum- 
cision upon their new subjects at the point of the sword.® At the same time 
the Hasmoneans lost their religious zeal and, over the bitter protests of the 
Pharisees, yielded more and more to the Hellenizing elements in the popula- 
tion. Queen Salome Alexandra (78-69 b.c.) reversed this trend and made 
peace with the Pharisees, but even before her death her sons Hyrcanus II 
and Aristobulus II began a war of succession. Both parties submitted theii 
claims to Pompey, who now (63 b.c.) stood with his victorious legions at 
Damascus. When Pompey decided for Hyrcanus, Aristobulus fortified him- 
self with his army in Jerusalem. Pompey laid siege to the capital and gained 
its lower sections; but the followers of Aristobulus took refuge in the 
walled precincts of the Temple and held out for three months. Their piety, 
we are told, helped Pompey to overcome them; for perceiving that they 
would not fight on the Sabbath, he had his men prepare unhindered on each 
Sabbath the mounds and battering rams for the next day’s assault. Meanwhile 



531 


CHAP. XXV) ROME AND JUDEA 

the priests offered the usual prayers and sacrifices in the Temple. WTien the 
ramparts fell 12,000 Jews were slaughtered; few resisted, none surrendered, 
many leaped to death from the walls.® Pompey ordered his men to leave 
the treasures of the Temple untouched, but he exacted an indemnity of 

10.000 talents ($3,600,000) from the nation. The cities that the Hasmoneans 
had conquered were transferred from the Judean to the Roman power; 
Hyrcanus II was made high priest and nominal ruler of Judea, but as the 
ward of Antipater the Idumean, who had helped Rome. The independent 
monarchy was ended, and Judea became part of the Roman province of 
Syria. 

In 54 B.c. Crassus, on his way to play the part of Pentheus at Ctesiphon, 
robbed the Temple of the treasures that Pompey had spared, amounting to 
some 10,000 talents. When news came that Crassus had been defeated and 
killed, the Jews took the opportunity to reclaim their freedom. Longinus, 
successor of Crassus as governor of Syria, suppressed the revolt and sold 

30.000 Jews into slavery (43 b.c.).'^ In that same year Antipater died; the 
Parthians swept across the desert into Judea and set up, as their puppet king, 
Antigonus, the last of the Hasmoneans. Antony and Octavian countered by 
naming Herod— son of Antipater— king of Judea and financing his Jewish 
army with Roman funds. Herod drove out the Parthians, protected Jeru- 
salem from pillage, sent Antigonus to Antony for execution, slew all Jewish 
leaders who had supported the puppet, and so auspiciously entered upon one 
of the most colorful reigns in history (37-4 b.c.). 


III. HEROD THE GREAT 

His character was typical of an age that had produced so many men of 
intellect without morals, ability without scruple, and courage without honor. 
He was in his lesser way the Augustus of Judea: like Augustus he overlaid 
the chaos of freedom with dictatorial order, beautified his capital with Greek 
architecture and sculpture, enlarged his realm, made it prosper, achieved 
more by subtlety than by arms, married widely, was broken by the treachery 
of his offspring, and knew every good fortune but happiness. Josephus 
describes him as a man of great physical bravery and skill, a perfect marks- 
man with arrow and javelin, a mighty hunter who in one day caught forty 
wild beasts, and “such a warrior as could not be withstood.” ® He must have 
added some charm of personality to these qualities, for he was always able 
to outtalk or outbribe the enemies who sought to discredit him with Antony, 
Cleopatra, or Octavian. From every crisis with the Triumvirs he emerged 



CAESAR AND CHRIST 


532 


(chap. XXV 


with larger powers and territory than before, until Augustus judged him 
“too great a soul for so small a dominion,” restored the cities of Hasmonean 
Palestine^ to his kingdom, and wished Herod might rule Syria and Egypt 
too.® “The Idumean” was a generous as well as a ruthless man, and the bene- 
fits he conferred upon his subjects were equaled only by the injuries he 
did them. 

He was molded in part by the hatred of those whom he had defeated or 
whose relatives he had slain, and by the scornful hostility of a people that 
resented his harsh autocracy and his alien descent. He had become king by 
the help and money of Rome, and remained to the end of his life a friend 
and vassal of the power from which the people night and day plotted to re- 
gain their hberty. The modest economy of the country bent and at last 
broke under the taxes imposed upon it by a luxurious court and a building 
program out of proportion to the national wealth. Herod sought in various 
ways to appease his subjects, but failed. He forgave taxes in poor years, per- 
suaded Rome to reduce the tribute it exacted, secured privileges for Jews 
abroad, relieved famine and other calamities promptly, maintained internal 
order and external security, and developed the natural resources of the land. 
Brigandage was ended, trade was stimulated, the markets and ports were 
noisy wiifi fife. At the same time the King alienated public sentiment by the 
looseness of his morals, the cruelty of his punishments, and the “accidental” 
drowning, in the bath, of Aristobulus, grandson of Hyrcanus II and there- 
fore the legitimate heir to the throne. The priests whose power he had ended, 
and whose leaders he appointed, conspired against him, and the Pharisees 
abominated his apparent resolution to make Judea a Hellenistic state. 

Ruling many cities that were more Greek than Jewish in population and 
culture, and impressed with the refinement and variety of Hellenic civiliza- 
tion, Herod, himself not by origin or conviction a Jew, naturally sought a 
cultural unity for his realm, and an imposing fagade for his rule, by encour- 
aging Greek ways, dress, ideas, literature, and art. He surrounded himself 
with Greek scholars, entrusted to them high affairs of state, and made Nicolas 
of Damascus, a Greek, his official counselor and historian. He raised at great 
expense a theater and an amphitheater in Jerusalem, adorned them with 
monuments to Augustus and other pagans, and introduced Greek athletic 
and musical contests and Roman gladiatorial combats.^® He beautified 
Jerusalem with other buildings in what seemed to the people a foreign archi- 
tectural style, and set up in public places Greek statuary whose nudity 
startled the Jews as much as the nakedness of the wrestlers in the games. He 
built himself a palace, doubtless on Greek models, filled it with gold and 
marble and costly furniture, and surrounded it with extensive gardens after 



ROME AND JUDEA 


533 


CHAP. XXV) 

the manner of his Roman friends. He shocked the people by telling them 
that the Temple which Zerubbabel had set up five centuries before was too 
small, and proposing to tear it down and erect a larger one on its site. Despite 
their protests and their fears he realized his plan and reared the lordly Temple 
that Titus would destroy. 

On Mt. Moriah an area was cleared 750 feet square. Along its boundaries 
cloisters were built roofed with cedar “curiously graven,” and supported by 
multiple rows of Corinthian columns, each a marble monolith so large that 
three men could barely join hands around it. In this main court were the 
booths of the money-changers, who for the convenience of pilgrims changed 
foreign coins into those acceptable to the Sanctuary; here, too, were the 
stalls where one might buy animals to offer in sacrifice, and the rooms or 
porticoes where teachers and pupils met to study Hebrew and the Law, 
and the noisy beggars inevitable in Oriental scenes. From this “Outer 
Temple” a broad flight of steps led up to an inner walled space which non- 
Jews were forbidden to enter; here was the “Court of the Women,” where 
“such men as were pure came tn with their wives.” From this second en- 
closure the worshiper passed up another flight of steps, and through gates 
plated with silver and gold, into the “Court of the Priests,” where stood, in 
the open air, the altar upon which burnt sacrifice was offered to Yahveh. Still 
other steps led through bronze doors seventy-five feet high and twenty-four 
wide, overhung with a famous golden vine, into the temple proper, open only 
to priests. It was btult entirely of white marble, in set-back style, and its fa- 
gade was plated with gold. The interior was divided crosswise by a great em- 
broidered veil, blue and purple and scarlet. Before the veil were the golden 
seven-branched candlestick, the altar of incense, and the table bearing the 
unleavened “shewbread” that the priests laid before Yahveh. Behind the 
veil was the Holy of Holies, which in the earlier temple had contained a 
golden censer and the Ark of the Covenant, but in this temple, says Josephus, 
contained “nothing whatever.” Here human foot trod only once a year, on 
the Day of Atonement, when the high priest entered alone. The main struc- 
tures of this historic edifice were finished in eight years; the work of adorn- 
ment, however, continued for eighty years, and was just completed when 
Titus’ legions came.^^ 

The people were proud of the great shrine, which was ranked among the 
marvels of the Augustan world; for its splendor they almost forgave the 
Corinthian columns of the porticoes and the golden eagle that— defying 
the Jewish prohibition of graven images— symbohzed at the very entrance to 
the Temple the power of Judea’s enemy and master, Rome. Meanwhile Jews 
who traveled brought back news of the completely Greek buildings with 
which Herod was remaking the other cities of Palestine, and told how he was 



534 CAESAR AND CHRIST ( CHAP. XXV 

spending national funds, and (rumor said) the gold that had been hidden in 
David’s tomb,^® in constructing a great harbor at Caesarea, and lavishing 
gifts upon such foreign cities as Damascus, Byblus, Berytus, Tyre, Sidon, 
Antioch, Rhodes, Pergamum, Sparta, and Athens. Herod, it became clear, 
wished to be the idol of the Hellenic world, not merely the King of the 
Jews. But the Jews lived by their religion, by their faith that Yahveh would 
someday rescue them from bondage and oppression; the triumph of the 
Hellenic over the Hebraic spirit in the person of their ruler foreboded to 
them a disaster as great as the persecutions of Antiochus. Plots were formed 
against Herod’s life; he discovered them, arrested the conspirators, tortured 
and killed them, and in some cases put their entire families to death.^^ He 
set spies among the people, disguised himself to eavesdrop on his subjects, 
and punished every hostile word.^® 

He foiled all his enemies except his wives and his children. Of wives he had 
ten, once nine at a time; of children, fourteen. His second wife, iVIariamne, 
was the grandaughter of Hyrcanus II and the sister of Aristobulus, both of 
whom Herod had slain. She was, says Josephus, “a chaste woman, but some- 
what rough by nature, and treated her husband imperiously because she 
saw he was so fond of her as to be her slave. . . . She would also expose his 
mother and sister openly, on account of the meanness of their birth, and 
would speak unkindly of them, insomuch that there was an unpardoning 
hatred among the women” of the royal household. Herod’s sister persuaded 
him that Mariamne was plotting to poison him. He accused his wife before 
the members of his court; they condemned her, and she was executed. 
Doubtful of her guilt, Herod was for a time mad with remorse; he called 
out her name repeatedly, sent his servants to summon her, gave up public 
affairs, went into the desert, “afflicted himself bitterly,” and was brought to 
his palace in a state of fever and insanity. Alariamne’s mother joined with 
others in an attempt to depose him; he suddenly recovered his powers of 
mind and throne, and put the plotters to death. Soon thereafter Antipater, 
his son by his first wife, laid proofs before him of an attempted conspiracy 
by Alexander and Aristobulus, his sons by Mariamne; he submitted the 
matter to a council of 150 men, who sentenced the youths to die (6 b.c.). 
Two years later Nicolas of Damascus convicted Antipater himself of schem- 
ing to replace his father. Herod had the youth brought before him and “be- 
gan to weep, lamenting the misfortunes he had suffered from his children.” 

In a moment of mercy he ordered Antipater jailed. 

Meanwhile the old king was breaking down with disease and grief. He 
suffered from dropsy, ulcer, fever, convulsions, and loathsome breath. After 
frustrating so many attempts against his life he tried to kill himself, but was 
prevented. Hearing that Antipater had sought to bribe the guard to free 



535 


CHAP.XXV) ROME AND JUDEA 

him, Herod had him slain. Five days afterward he too died (4 b.c.), in the 
sixty-ninth year of his age, hated by all his people. It was said of him by his 
enemies that “he stole to the throne like a fox, ruled like a tiger, and died 
like a dog.” 


IV. THE LAW AND ITS PROPHETS 

Herod’s will divided his kingdom among three remaining sons. To Philip 
went the eastern region known as Batanea, containing the cities of Beth- 
saida, Capitolias, Gerasa, Philadelphia, and Bostra. To Herod Antipas went 
Peraea (the land beyond the Jordan) and, in the north, Galilee, where lay 
Esdraela, Tiberias, and Nazareth. To Archelaus fell Samaritis, Idumea, and 
Judea. In this last were many famous cities or towns: Bethlehem, Hebron, 
Beersheba, Gaza, Gadara, Emmaus, Jamnia, Joppa, Caesarea, Jericho, and 
Jerusalem. Some Palestinian cities were predominantly Greek, some Syrian; 
the Gadarene swine attest the non-Jews of Gadara. The gentiles were in the 
majority in all the coast towns except Joppa and Jamnia, and in the “Decap- 
olis” or ten cities of the Jordan; in the interior the villages were almost 
entirely Jewish. In this racial division, not iinpleasing to Rome, lay the 
tragedy of Palestine. 

We must go back to the Puritans of England to understand the repulsion 
aroused in pious Jews by the polytheism and immorality of pagan society. 
Religion was to the Jews the source of their law, their state, and their hope: 
to let it melt away in the swelling river of Hellenism would, they thought, 
be national suicide. Hence that mutual hatred of Jew and gentile which 
kept the little nation in a kind of undulating fever of racial strife, political 
turbulence, and periodic war. Moreover, the Jews of Judea scorned the 
people of Galilee as ignorant backsliders, and the Galileans scorned the 
Judeans as slaves caught in the cobwebs of the Law. Again, a perpetual feud 
burned between Judeans and Samaritans; for the latter claimed that their 
hill of Gerizim, and not Zion, had been chosen by Yahveh as his home, and 
they rejected aU the Scriptures except the Pentateuch.^® All these factions 
agreed in hating the Roman power, which made them pay a heavy price for 
the unwelcome privilege of peace. 

There were now in Palestine some 2,500,000 souls, of whom perhaps 
100,000 Hved in Jerusalem.^® Most of them spoke Aramaic; priests and 
scholars understood Hebrew; officials and foreigners and most authors used 
Greek. The majority of the people were peasants, tilling and irrigating the 
soil, tending the orchard, the vine, and the flock. In the time of Christ 
Palestine grew enough wheat to export a modest surplus: its dates, figs, 
grapes and olives, wine and oil were prized and bought throughout the Medi- 



536 CAESAR AND CHRIST (CHAP. XXV 

terranean. The old command was still obeyed to let the land lie fallow in 
each sabbatical year.^^ Handicrafts were largely hereditary and were usually 
organized in guilds. Jewish opinion honored the worker, and most scholars 
plied their hands as well as their tongues. Slaves were fewer than in any other 
Mediterranean country. Petty trade flourished, but there were as yet few 
Jewish merchants of large means and range, “We are not a commercial 
people,” said Josephus; “we live in a country [eastern Judea] without a sea- 
board, and have no inclination to [foreign] trade.” Financial operations 
were of minor scope until Hillel, perhaps at Herod’s suggestion, abrogated 
the law of Deuteronomy (xv, r-ii) requiring the cancellation of debts 
every seventh year. The Temple itself was the national bank. 

Within the Temple was the hall Gazith, meeting place of the Sanhedrin 
or Great Council of the Elders of Israel. Probably the institution arose in the 
period of Seleucid rule {ca. 200 b.c.), to replace the earlier council menr 
tioned in Numbers (xi, 16) as advising Moses. Originally selected by the 
high priest from the sacerdotal aristocracy, it had come in Roman times 
to co-opt into its membership a rising number of Pharisees and a few profes- 
sional Scribes.^® These seventy-one men, under the presidency of the high 
priest, claimed supreme power over all Jews everywhere, and orthodox 
Jews everywhere acknowledged it; but the Hasmoneans, Herod, and Rome 
recognized their authority only in violations of Jewish law by a Judean Jew, 
They could pass sentence of death upon Jews in Judea for religious offenses, 
but could not execute it without confirmation by the civil power.^^ 

In this assembly, as in most, two factions fought for predominance— a con- 
servative group led by the higher priests and the Sadducees, and a liberal 
group led by Pharisees and Scribes. Most of the upper clergy and upper 
classes belonged to the Sadducees {Zadokim), so named after their founder 
Zadok; they were nationalistic in politics and orthodox in religion; they 
stood for the enforcement of the Torah or written Law, but rejected the 
additional ordinances of the oral tradition and the hberalizing interpretations 
of the Pharisees. They doubted immortahty and were content to possess the 
good things of the earth. 

The Pharisees {Perushun, separatists) were so named by the Sadducees as 
meaning that they separated themselves (like good Brahmans) from those 
who contracted rehgious impurity by neglecting the requirements of ritual 
cleanliness.^® They were a continuation of the Chasidim, or Devotees, of the 
Maccabean age, who had upheld the strictest application of the Law. 
Josephus, himself a Pharisee, defined them as “a body of Jews who profess to 
be more religious than the rest, and to explain the laws more precisely,” 
For this purpose they added to the written Law of the Pentateuch the oral 
tradition of interpretations and decisions made by recognized teachers of the 



537 


CHAP. XXV) ROME AND JUDEA 

Law. These interpretations were necessary, in the judgment of the Phari- 
sees, to clarify the obscurities of the Mosaic Code, to specify its application 
in particular cases, and to modify its letter, occasionally, in adaptation to the 
changed needs and conditions of hfe. They were at once rigorous and 
lenient, softening the Law here and there as in Hillel s decree on interest, 
but demanding the full observation of the oral tradition as well as of the 
Torah. Only through this full obedience, they felt, could the Jews escape 
assimilation and extinction. Reconciled to Roman domination, the Pharisees 
sought consolation in the hope of a physical and spiritual immortality. They 
lived simply, condemned luxury, fasted frequently, washed sedulously, 
and were now and then irritatingly conscious of their virtue; but they repre- 
sented the moral strength of Judaism, won the middle classes to their support, 
and gave their followers a faith and rule that saved them from disintegration 
when catastrophe came. After the Temple was destroyed (a.d. 70), the 
priesthood lost influence, the Sadducees disappeared, the synagogue replaced 
the temple, and the Pharisees, through the rabbis, became the teachers and 
shepherds of a scattered but undefeated people. 

The most extreme of the Jewish sects was that of the Essenes. They de- 
rived their piety from the Chasidim, their name probably from the Chaldaic 
aschai (bather) , their doctrine and practice from the stream of ascetic theory 
and regimen circulating through the world of the last century before Christ; 
possibly they were influenced by Brahmanic, Buddhist, Parsee, Pythagorean, 
and Cynic ideas that came to the crossroads of trade at Jerusalem. Number- 
ing some 4000 in Palestine, they organized themselves into a distinct order, 
observed both the written and the oral Law with passionate exactitude, and 
lived together as almost monastic celibates tilling the soil in the oasis of 
Engadi amid the desert west of the Dead Sea. They dwelt in homes owned 
by their community, had their meals in common and in silence, chose their 
leaders by a general vote, mingled their goods and earnings in a common 
treasury, and obeyed the Chasidic motto, “Aline and thine belong to thee. 
Many of them, says Josephus, “lived more than a hundred years because of 
their simple diet and regular hfe.” Each clothed himself in white hnen, 
carried a httle hoe to cover his droppings, washed himself like a Brahmin 
afterward, and considered it a sacrilege to evacuate on the Sabbath.*® A few 
of them married and lived in towns, but practiced the T. olstoian rule of co- 
habiting with their wives only to beget children. The members of the sect 
avoided all sensual pleasure and sought through meditation and prayer a 
mystic union with God. They hoped that by piety, abstinence, and con- 
templation they might acquire magic powers and foresee the future. Like 
most people of their time they believed in angels and demons, thought of 
diseases as possession by evil spirits, and tried to exorcise these by magical 



538 CAESAR AND CHRIST (CHAP.XXV 

formulas; from their “secret doctrine” came some parts of the Cabala.^® 
They looked for the coming of a Messiah who would establish a communistic 
egalitarian Kingdom of Heaven (Malchuth Shamayim) on earth; into that 
Kingdom only those would enter who had led a spotless hfe.^^ They were 
ardent pacifists and refused to make implements of war; but when the legions 
of Titus attacked Jerusalem and the Temple the Essenes joined other Jews 
in defending their city and its shrine and fought till nearly all of then- 
order were dead. As Josephus describes their customs and their sufferings we 
enter into the atmosphere of Christianity; 

Although they were tortured and racked, burnt and tom to pieces, 
and went through every torment to force them either to blaspheme 
their legislator, or to eat what was forbidden them, yet could they not 
be made to do either of them; no, nor once to flatter their tormentors, 
or to shed a tear. But they smiled in their very pains, and laughed 
those to scorn who tortured them, and gave up their souls in great 
cheerfulness, as expecting to receive them again.^^ 

These— Sadducees, Pharisees, Essenes— were the chief religious sects of 
Judea in the generation before Christ. The Scribes {Hakminn, learned) 
whom Jesus so often bracketed with the Pharisees were not a sect but a 
profession; they were scholars learned in the Law, who lectured on it in 
synagogues, taught it in schools, debated it in public and private, and ap- 
plied it in judgment on specific cases. A few of them were priests, some were 
Sadducees, most were Pharisees; they were in the two centuries before Hillel 
what the rabbis were after him. They were the hirispnidentes of Judea, 
whose legal opinions, selected by time and transmitted by word of mouth 
from teacher to pupil, became part of that oral tradition which the Pharisees 
honored along with the written Law. Under their influence the Code of 
Moses proliferated into thousands of detailed precepts designed to meet 
every circumstance. 

The earliest definite figure among these lay teachers of the Law is that of 
Hillel, and even he is nearly lost in the web of legend that a fond posterity 
wove about his name. We are told that he was born in Babylon (75 b.c.?) 
of a distinguished but impoverished family. He came as a grown man to 
Jerusalem, where he supported his wife and children by manual labor. Half 
his daily wage he paid for admission to the school where two famous masters, 
Shemaya and Abtolim, expounded the Law. Lacking the fee one day, and 
denied entry, he climbed upon a window sfll “that he might hear the words 
of the living God.” Frozen with the cold, story says, he fell into the snow 
and was found there half dead the next morning.^® He became in his turn a 
revered rabbi or teacher, renowned for his modesty, patience, and gentleness. 



539 


CHAP. XXV) ROME AND JUDEA 

One account tells how a man wagered he could anger Hillel, and lost.®^ He 
laid down three principles for the guidance of life: love of man, of peace, 
and of the Law and the knowledge of it. When a would-be proselyte asked 
him to explain the Law in as little time as a man could stand on one foot, 
Hillel answered: “What is hateful to thyself do not do to another”;®®* it 
was a cautiously negative form of that Golden Rule which had long before 
been phrased positively in Leviticus. Again Hillel taught: “Judge not thy 
neighbor until thou art in his place.” He sought to quiet the quarreling 
sects by laying down seven rules for interpreting the Law. His own inter- 
pretations were hberal; most notably, he facilitated the lending of money 
and the procurement of divorce. He was a pacifier, not a reformer; “sepa- 
rate not thyself from the congregation,” he advised the young rebels of his 
day. He accepted Hercd as an inescapable evil and was appointed by him 
president of the Sanhedrin (30 b.c.). Its Pharisean majority loved him so 
well that he remained head of the Great Council until his death (a.d. 10). 
Out of respect for his memory the office was made hereditary in his family 
for 400 years. 

The Council gave its second place of honor to Hillel’s rival, the conserva- 
tive rabbi Shammai. He taught a much stricter interpretation of the Law, 
rejected divorce, and demanded the literal application of the Torah, 
regardless of new conditions. This division of Jewish teachers into con- 
servative and liberal groups had existed for a century before Hillel, and con- 
tinued until the destruction of the Temple. 


V. THE GREAT EXPECTATION 

The Jewish literature that has come down to us from this period is almost 
entirely religious. Just as it seemed to the orthodox Hebrew a profanation to 
make images of the deity, or to adorn his temples with plastic art, so it 
seemed to him an error to write philosophy or literature for any other ulti- 
mate purpose than to praise God and glorify the Law. There were of course 
many exceptions, of which the pretty story of Susannah may serve as an 
instance. It tells of a fair Jewess falsely accused of unchastity by two unsatis- 
fied elders, and freed through the skillful cross-examination of witnesses by a 
youth named Daniel. Even this romance found its way into some editions of 
the Book of Daniel. 

The book of Joshua son of Sirach, which we know as Ecclesiasticus, may 
be as late as this period; it is one of many Apocrypha— “hidden” or unau- 

• The Talmud attributes to Hillel’s reply the additional words, “This is all the Law, the 
rest is commentary.” ^8 


CAESAR AND CHRIST 


540 


(chap. XXV 


thentic compositions not accepted into the Jewish canon of the Old Testa- 
ment; rich in beauty and wisdom, it did not deserve to be excluded from the 
company of Ecclesiastes and Job. In its twenty-fourth chapter we find again, 
as in the eighth chapter of Proverbs, the doctrine of the Logos or Incarnate 
Word: “Wisdom the first product of God, created from the beginning of 
the world.” Between 130 b.c. and a.d. 40 an Alexandrian Jew— or a number 
of Hellenistic Jews— published a Book of the Wisdom of Solomon, which 
sought, like Philo, to harmonize Judaism and Platonism, and called Hellen- 
izing Jews back to the Law in prose as noble as any since Isaiah. A lesser 
work, the Psalms of Solornon {ca. 50 b.c.), is rich in anticipation of a Re- 
deemer for Israel. 

This hope of salvation from Rome and earthly suffering through the 
coming of a divine Redeemer rings through nearly all the Jewish literature 
of this age. Many productions took the form of apocalypses or revelations, 
whose aim was to make the past intelligible and forgivable by presenting it 
as a prelude to a triumphant future revealed to some seer by God. The Book 
of Daniel, written about 165 b.c. to encourage Israel against Antiochus 
Epiphanes, was still circulating among Jews who could not believe that 
Yahveh would let them long remain under pagan domination. The Book of 
Enoch, probably the work of several authors between 170 and 66 b.c., took 
the form of visions vouchsafed to the patriarch who, in Genesis (v, 24), had 
“walked with God.” It recounted the fall of Satan and his cohorts, the con- 
sequent intrusion of evil and suffering into human life, the redemption of 
mankind by a Messiah, and the coming of the Kingdom of Heaven. About 
150 b.c. Jewish writers began to publish Sibylline Oracles, in which various 
sibyls or prophetesses were represented as defending Judaism against pagan- 
ism and foretelling the final victory of the Jews over their enemies. 

The idea of the saving god had probably come to western Asia from 
Persia and Babylonia.^® In the Zoroastrian creed all history and life were 
represented as a war between the holy forces of light and the diabolical 
powers of darkness; in the end a savior would come— Shaosyant or Mithras— 
to judge all men and establish an everlasting reign of righteousness and 
peace. To many Jews the rule of Rome seemed part of the transient victory 
of evil. They denounced the greed, treachery, brutality, and idolatry of 
“gentile” civilization and the “atheistic” hedonism of an epicurean world. 
According to the Book of Wisdom 


the ungodly said: Our life is short and tedious, and in the death of 
3 man there is no remedy; neither was there any man known to re- 
turn from the grave. ... For the breath in our nostrils is as smoke 
and a little spark in the moving of our heart; which being ex- 
tinguished, our body shall be turned into ashes, and our spirit shall 



ROME AND JUDEA 


541 


CHAP. XXV) 

vanish as the soft air, and our name shall be forgotten, and our life 
shall pass away as the trace of a cloud, as a mist dispersed by the 
beams of the sun. . . . Come on, let us enjoy the good things that 
are present ... let no flower of the spring pass us by; let us crown 
ourselves with rosebuds before they be withered; let us leave tokens 
of our joyfulness in every place.®* 

These epicureans reason falsely, says the author; they hitch their wagon to a 
falling star, since pleasure is a vain and transitory thing. 

For the hope of the ungodly man is as chaff swept away by the wind, 
and as thin hoar-frost scattered by the tempest; it passeth as the 
remembrance of a guest who tarrieth but a day. But the righteous 
shall live forever, and the care of them is with the Most High. There- 
fore shall they receive a glorious kingdom, and a diadem of beauty 
from the hand of the Lord.^® 

The reign of evil will be brought to an end, according to the apocalyptic 
books, either by the direct intervention of God himself or the earthly com- 
ing of his son or representative, the Messiah or Anointed One.* Had not 
the prophet Isaiah, a century back foretold him? 

For unto us a child is bom, a son is given; and the government shall 
be upon his shoulder, and his name shall be called . . . the mighty 
God, the Prince of Peace.^^ 

Many Jews agreed with Isaiah (xi, i) in describing the Messiah as an earthly 
king who would be bom of the royal house of David; others, like the authors 
of Enoch and Daniel, called him the Son of Man, and pictured him as com- 
ing down from heaven. The philosopher of Proverbs and the poet of the 
Wisdom of Solomon,”*^ perhaps influenced by Plato’s Ideas or the Stoic 
anbm mimdi, saw him as incarnate Wisdom, the first-begotten of God, the 
Word or Reason (logos) that would soon play so great a role in Philo’s phi- 
losophy. Nearly all the apocalyptic authors thought that the xMessiah would 
triumph speedily; but Isaiah in a remarkable passage had conceived him as 

despised and rejected of men, a man of sorrows and acquainted with 
grief. . . . Surely he hath borne our griefs, and carried our sorrows 
... he was wounded for our transgressions, bruised for our iniqui- 
ties . . . and with his stripes we are healed. The Lord hath laid upon 
him the iniquity of us all. . . . He was taken from prison and from 
judgment, and was cut off out of the land of the living. . . . He 
bare the sin of many, and made intercession for the transgressors.^® 

* The word Messiah iHeb. mahsiah) occurs frequently in the Old Testament. The Jews 
who made the Septuagint (ca. 280 b.c.) translated it into the Greek Christos, the Anointed, he 
upon whom has been poured a chrism or holy oil. 



CAESAR AND CHRIST 


542 


(chap. XXV 


All, however, agreed that in the end the Messiah would subdue the heathen, 
free Israel,"** make Jerusalem his capital, and win all men to accept Yahveh 
and the Mosaic Law.*® Thereafter a “Good Time” would come of happiness 
for the whole world: all the earth would be fertile, every seed would bear 
a thousandfold, wine would be plentiful, poverty would disappear, all men 
would be healthy and virtuous, and justice, good fellowship, and peace 
would reign over the earth.*® Some seers thought that this joyful age would 
be interrupted, that the powers of darkness and evil would make a last assault 
upon the happy kingdom, and that the world would be consumed in chaos 
and conflagration. In the final “Day of God” the dead would rise and be 
judged by the “Ancient of Days” (Yahveh), or by the “Son of Man,” to 
whom absolute and everlasting dominion would then be given over a reno- 
vated world, the Kingdom of God. The wicked would be cast down head- 
long and speechless “into Hell,” but the good would be received into 
unending blessedness. 

Essentially the movement of thought in Judea was parallel with that in 
the pagan theology of the time; a people that had once thought of the future 
in terms of its national destiny lost its trust in the state and thought of salva- 
tion in spiritual and individual terms. The mystery religions had brought this 
hope to many millions in Greece, the Hellenic East, and Italy; but nowhere 
was the hope so earnest, or its need so great, as in Judea. The poor or be- 
reaved, the oppressed or scorned of the earth, looked for some divine re- 
deemer of their subjection and their suffering. Soon, said the apocalypses, a 
savior would come, and in his triumph all just men would be lifted up, even 
out of the grave, into a paradise of eternal bliss. Old saints like Simeon, 
mystic women like Anna daughter of Phanuel, passed their lives about the 
Temple, fasting, waiting, praying that they might look upon the Redeemer 
before they died. A great expectation filled the hearts of men. 


VI. THE REBELLION 

No people in history has fought so tenaciously for liberty as the Jews, 
nor any people against such odds. From Judas Maccabee to Simeon Bar 
Cocheba, and even into our own time, the struggle of the Jews to regain their 
freedom has often decimated them, but has never broken their spirit or 
their hope. 

When Herod the Great died the nationalists, spuming the pacific counsels of 
Hillel, declared a revolt against Herod’s successor Archelaus, and encamped in 
tents about the Temple. Archelaus’ troops slew 3000 of them, manv of whom 
had come to Jerusalem for the Passover festival (4 b.c.). At the following feast of 



CHAP. XXV) ROME AND JUDEA 543 

Pentecost the rebels gathered again, and orice more suffered great slaughter; the 
Temple cloisters were burned to the ground, the treasures of the sanctuary were 
plundered by the legions, and many Jews killed themselves in despair. Patriot 
bands took form in the countryside, and made life precarious for any supporter 
of Rome; one such band, under Judas the Gaulonite, captured Sepphoris, the 
capital of Galilee. Varus, governor of Syria, entered Palestine with 20,000 men, 
razed hundreds of towns, crucified 2000 rebels, and sold 30,000 Jews into slavery. 
A delegation of leading Jews went to Rome and begged Augustus to abolish 
the kingship in Judea. Augustus removed Archelaus, and made Judea a Roman 
province of the second class, under a procurator responsible to the governor of 
Syria (a.d. 6). 

Under Tiberius the troubled land knew a moment’s peace. Caligula, 
wishing to make the worship of the emperor a unifying religion throughout 
the Empire, ordered all cults to include a sacrifice to his image, and bade 
the Jerusalem officials to install his statue in the Temple. The Jews had 
compromised, under Augustus and Tiberius, by sacrificing to Yahveh in 
the name of the emperor; but they were so averse to setting up the graven 
image of a pagan in their Temple that thousands of them, we are told, went 
to the governor of Syria and asked to be slain in cold blood before the edict 
should be carried out.^® Caligula eased the situation by dying. Impressed 
by Herod’s grandson Agrippa, Claudius made him king of nearly all Pales- 
tine (41) ; but Agrippa’s sudden death released another outburst of disorder, 
and Claudius restored the procuratorial rule (44). 

The men whom his mercenary freedmen chose for this office were mostly 
incompetents or scoundrels. Felix, made procurator by his brother Pallas, 
“governed Judea,” says Tacitus, “with the powers of a king and the soul of 
a slave.” Festus ruled more justly, but died in the attempt. Albinus, if we 
may believe Josephus, plundered and taxed assiduously, and made a fortune 
by releasing criminals from jail for a consideration; “nobody remained in 
prison but those who gave him nothing.” Florus, says the same friend and 
admirer of the Romans, behaved “hke an executioner rather than a gov- 
ernor,” despoiled whole cities, and not only stole on his own account, but 
connived at other robberies if allowed to share the loot. These reports 
retain some odor of war propaganda; doubtless the procurators complained 
that the Jews were a very troublesome people to oppress. 

Bands of “Zealots” and “Dagger-men” (Sicarii) were formed in protest 
against this misrule. Their members, pledged to kill any disloyal Jew, 
mingled in street gatherings, stabbed their appointed victims from behind, 
and disappeared in the chaos of the crowd.®® When Florus took seventeen 
talents ($61,200) from the Temple treasury, an angry mob collected before 
the shrine and cried out for his dismissal; some youths went about with 



544 CAESAR AND CHRIST (cHAP. XXV 

baskets begging alms for him as suffering from poverty. Floras’ legions 
dispersed the assemblage, plundered hundreds of homes, and slew the occu- 
pants; the leading rebels were scourged and crucified; on that day, says 
Josephus, 3600 Jews were slain.®* The old or w'ell-to-do Hebrews counseled 
patience, arguing that revolt against so powerful an empire would be 
national suicide; the young or poor accused them of connivance and 
cowardice. The two factions divided the city and nearly every family; one 
seized the upper part of Jerusalem, the other the lower, and each attacked 
the other with every weapon at hand. In 68 a pitched battle was fought 
between the groups; the radicals won, and killed 12,000 Jews, including 
nearly all the rich;®^ the revolt had become a revolution. A rebel force 
surrounded the Roman garrison at Masada, persuaded it to disarm, and 
then slaughtered every man of it. On that day the gentiles of Caesarea, the 
Palestinian capital, rose in a pogrom that slew 20,000 Jews; other thousands 
were sold into slavery. In one day the gentiles of Damascus cut the throats 
of 10,000 Jews.®® The enraged revolutionists laid waste many Greek cities 
in I^alestine and Syria, burned some of them to the ground, and killed and 
were killed in great number. “It was then common,” says Josephus, “to 
see cities filled with dead bodies . . . unburied, those of old men mixed 
with infants, and women lying among them without any cover.” ®* By 
September of 66 the revolution had won Jerusalem and nearly all of Pales- 
tine. The peace party was discredited, and most of its members now joined 
in the revolt. 

Among them was a priest named Josephus, then a young man of thirty, 
energetic, brilliant, and endowed with an intellect capable of transforming 
every desire into a virtue. Commissioned by the rebels to fortify Galilee, 
he defended its stronghold, Jotopata, against Vespasian’s siege, until only 
forty Jewish soldiers remained alive, hiding with him in a cave. Josephus 
wished to surrender, but his men threatened to kill him if he tried it. Since 
they preferred death to capture, he persuaded them to draw lots to fix the 
order in which each should die by the hand of the next; when all were 
dead but himself and one other, he induced him to join him in surrender. 
They were about to be sent to Rome in chains when Josephus prophesied 
that Vespasian would be emperor. Vespasian released him, and gradually 
accepted him as a useful adviser in the war against the Jews. When Vespasian 
left for Alexandria, Josephus accompanied Titus to the siege of Jerusalem. 

The approach of the legions brought the defenders to a belated and 
fanatical unity. Tacitus reckons that 600,000 rebels had gathered in the 
city. “All who were capable of serving appeared in arms,” and the women 
were not less martial than the men.®* Josephus, from the Roman lines, 
called upon the besieged to surrender; they branded him as a traitor and 



CHAP.XXV) ROME AND JUDEA 545 

fought to the last. Starving Jews made desperate sorties to forage for food; 
thousands of them were captured by the Romans, and were crucified; “the 
multitude of these was so great,” Josephus reports, “that room was wanting 
for the crosses, and crosses were wanting for the bodies.” In the later stages 
of the five-month siege the streets of the city were clogged with corpses; 
ghouls wandered about despoiling and stabbing the dead; we are told that 
116,000 bodies were thrown over the walls. Some Jews swallowed gold 
pieces and slipped out from Jerusalem; Romans or Syrians, capturing them, 
slit open their belhes, or searched their offal, to find the coins.®® Having 
taken half the city, Titus offered what he thought were lenient terms to the 
rebels; they rejected them. The flaming brands of the Romans set fire to 
the Temple, and the great edifice, much of it of wood, was rapidly con- 
sumed. The surviving defenders fought bravely, proud, says Dio, to die 
on Temple grounds.®® Some killed one another, some fell upon their own 
swords, some leaped Into the flames. The victors gave no quarter, but slew 
all Jews upon whom they could lay their hands; 97,000 fugitives were 
caught and sold as slaves; many of them died as unwilling gladiators in 
the triumphal games that were celebrated at Berytus, Caesarea Philippi, and 
Rome. Josephus numbered at 1,197,000 the Jews killed in this siege and its 
aftermath; Tacitus calculated them at 600,000 (a.d. 70) 

Resistance continued here and there till 73, but essentially the destruction 
of the Temple marked the end of the rebellion and of the Jewish state. The 
property of those who had shared in the revolt was confiscated and sold. 
Judea was almost shorn of Jews, and those that remained lived on the edge 
of starvation. Even the poorest Jew had now to pay to a pagan temple at 
Rome the half shekel that pious Hebrews had formerly paid each year for 
the upkeep of the Temple at Jerusalem. The high-priesthood and the San- 
hedrin were abolished. Judaism took the form that it has kept till our own 
time: a religion without a central shrine, without a dominant priesthood, 
without a sacrificial service. The Sadducees disappeared, while the Pharisees 
and the rabbis became the leaders of a homeless people that had nothing left 
but its ^nagogues and its hope. 


VII. THE DISPERSION 

The flight or enslavement of a million Jews so accelerated their spread 
through the Mediterranean that their scholars came to date the Diaspora 
from the destruction of Herod’s Temple. We have seen that this Disper- 
sion had begun six centuries before in the Babylonian Captivity, and had 
been renewed in the settling of Alexandria. Since fertility was commanded 



54*5 CAESAR AND CHRIST (cHAP. XXV 

and infanticide sternly forbidden by Jewish piety and law, the expansion 
of the Jews was due to biological as well as economic causes; Hebrews still 
played a very minor role in the commerce of the world. Fifty years before 
the fall of Jerusalem, Strabo, with anti-Semitic exaggeration, reported that 
“it is hard to find a single place on the habitable earth that has not admitted 
this tribe of men, and is not possessed by it.” Philo, twenty years before 
the Dispersion, described “the continents . . . full of Jewish settlements, 
and hkewise the . . . islands, and nearly all Babylonia.” ^ By a.d. 70 there 
were thousands of Jews in Seleucia on the Tigris, and in other Parthian 
cities; they were numerous in Arabia, and crossed thence into Ethiopia; 
they abounded in Syria and Phoenicia; they had large colonies in Tarsus, 
Antioch, Miletus, Ephesus, Sardis, Smyrna; they were only less numerous 
in Delos, Corinth, Athens, Philippi, Patrae, Thessalonica. In the west there 
were Jewish communities in Carthage, Syracuse, Puteoli, Capua, Pompeii, 
Rome, even in Horace’s native Venusia. AU in all we may reckon 7,000,000 
Jews in the Empire— some seven per cent of the population, twice their pro- 
portion in the United States of America today.®® 

Their number, dress, diet, circumcision, poverty, ambition, prosperity, exclu- 
siveness, intelligence, aversion to images, and observation of an inconvenient 
Sabbath aroused an anti-Semitism that ranged from jokes in the theater and 
slurs in Juvenal and Tacitus to murders in the street and wholesale pogroms. 
Apion of Alexandria made himself the chief mouthpiece of these attacks, and 
Josephus answered him in an incisive pamphlet.* 

After the fall of Jerusalem Josephus sailed to Rome with Titus, and accom- 
panied the conqueror of his people in a triumphal procession that exhibited 
captive Jews and Jewish spoils. Vespasian gave him Roman citizenship, a pension, 
an apartment in his palace, and profitable lands in Judea.®® In return Josephus 
took Vespasian’s family name Flavius, and wrote The Wars of the Jews (ca.y^) 
to defend the actions of Titus in Palestine, to exonerate his own defection and 
to discourage further revolt by showing forth the might of Rome. In his later 
years (ca. 93), feeling more keenly his isolation, he wrote The Antiquities of 
the Jews to regain the good will of his people by giving gentiles a more favorable 
view of Jewish achievements, customs, and character. His narratives are clear 
and forceful, and his account of Herod the Great is as engaging as Plutarch but 
his bias and his aims impair his objectivity. The Antiquities required many 
years and exhausted the author’s strength; the last four of the twenty books 
were written by his secretaries from his notes.®® Josephus was still but fifty-six 
when the work appeared, but he was already worn out by a life of adventure 
controversy, and moral solitude. 

With their characteristic resilience the Jews gradually rebuilt their economic 

* Josephus rejoiced to leam that an ulcer had compelled Apion to be circumcized ®* 



ROME AND JUDEA 


CHAP. XXV) 


547 


and cultural life in Palestine. Amid the siege of Jerusalem an aged pupil of 
Hillel, Johanan ben Zakkai, fearful lest the carnage should destroy all teachers 
and transmitters of the oral tradition, escaped from the city, and set up an 
academy in a vineyard at Yabne, or Jamnia, near the Mediterranean coast. When 
Jerusalem fell Johanan organized a new Sanhedrin at Jamnia, composed not of 
priests, politicians, and rich men, but of Pharisees and rabbis— i.e., teachers of 
the Law. This Bet Din or Council had no political power, but most Palestinian 
Jews recognized its authority in all matters of religion and morals. The patriarch 
whom the Council chose as its head appointed the administrative officers of the 
Jewish community, and had the power to excommunicate recalcitrant Jews. 
The stem discipline of the Patriarch Gamaliel II (ca. loo) welded into unity 
first the Council, then the Jews of Jamnia, then the Jews of Palestine. Under 
his leadership the contradictory interpretations of the Law transmitted by Hillel 
and Shammai were reviewed and voted on; those of Hillel were for the most part 
approved, and were made binding upon all Jews. 


Since the Law was now the indispensable cement of scattered and state- 
less Jewry, the teaching of the Law became the chief occupation of the 
synagogue throughout the Diaspora; the synagogue replaced the temple, 
prayer replaced sacrifice, the rabbi replaced the priest. T annaim— expositors 
—interpreted one or another of the orally transmitted laws (Halacha) of 
the Jews, usually supported it with scriptural quotation, sometimes added 
to it, and illustrated it with stories, homilies, or other material (Haggada ) . 
The most famous of the Tannaim was Rabbi Akiba ben Joseph. At the age 
of forty {ca. a.d. 8o) he joined his five-year-old son at school, and learned 
to read. Soon he could recite the whole Pentateuch by heart. After thirteen 
years of study he opened his own school under a fig tree in a village near 
Jamnia. His enthusiasm and idealism, his courage and humor, even his lusty 
dogmatism, brought him many students. When, in 95, word came that 
Domitian was planning new measures against the Jews, Akiba was chosen 
with Gamaliel and two others to make a personal appeal to the Emperor. 
While they were in Rome Domitian died. Nerva heard their plea favorably, 
and ended the fiscus ludaicus— the tax laid upon Jews for rebuilding Rome. 
On his return to Jamnia Akiba set himself the lifelong task of codifying 
the Halacha; his pupil Rabbi Meir and their successor Judah the Patriarch 
{ca. 200) completed the undertaking. Even in this classified form the Halacha 
remained part of the oral tradition, handed down from generation to genera- 
tion by scholars and professional memorizers— living textbooks of the Law. 
Akiba’s methods were as absurd as his conclusions were sound; he derived 
liberal principles from a weird exegesis in which every letter of the Torah, 
or written law, was held to have a mysterious meaning; perhaps he had 
observed that men will accept the rational only in the form of the mystical. 



CAESAR AND CHRIST 


548 


(chap. XXV 


From Akiba came that painstaking organization and exposition of theology 
and ethics which passed down through the Talmud to Maimonides, and 
ultimately to the methods of the Scholastic philosophers. 

In his ninetieth year, when he had grown weak and reactionary, Akiba 
found himself, as in his youth, surrounded by revolution. In 115-16 the Jews 
of Gyrene, Egypt, Cyprus, and Mesopotamia rose once more against Rome; 
the massacre of gentries by Jews, and of Jews by Gentiles, became the order 
of the day; 220,000 men, says Dio, were killed in Gyrene, 240,000 in Cyprus; 
the figures are incredible, but we know that Gyrene never recovered from 
the devastation, and that for centuries thereafter no Hebrew was allowed in 
Cyprus. The uprisings were suppressed, but the surviving Jews kept fiercely 
ahve their hope of a Messiah who would rebuild the Temple and restore 
them in triumph to Jerusalem. Roman stupidity reanimated the revolt. In 
130 Hadrian declared his intention to raise a shrine to Jupiter on the site 
of the Temple; in 1 3 1 he issued a decree forbidding circumcision and public 
instruction in the Jewish Law.®^ Under the leadership of Simeon Bar Co- 
cheba, who claimed to be the Messiah, the Jews made their last effort in 
antiquity to recover their homeland and their freedom (132). Akiba, who 
all his fife had preached peace, gave his blessing to the revolution by accept- 
ing Bar Cocheba as the promised Redeemer. For three years the rebels 
fought valiantly against the legions; finally they were beaten by lack of 
food and supplies. The Romans destroyed 985 towns in Palestine, and slew 
580,000 men; a still larger number, we are told, perished through starvation, 
disease, and fire; nearly all Judea was laid waste. Bar Cocheba himself fell 
in defending Bethar. So many Jews were sold as slaves that their price fell 
to that of a horse. Thousands hid in underground channels rather than be 
captured; surrounded by the Romans, they died one by one of hunger, while 
the living ate the bodies of the dead.®® 

Resolved to destroy the recuperative virihty of Judaism, Hadrian forbade 
not merely circumcision, but the observance of the Sabbath or any Jewish 
holyday, and the pubhc performance of any Hebrew ritual.®® A new and 
heavier poll tax was placed upon all Jews. They were allowed in Jerusalem 
only on one fixed day each year, when they might come and weep before 
the ruins of their Temple. The pagan city of Aelia Capitolina rose on the 
site of Jerusalem, with shrines to Jupiter and Venus, and with palaestras, 
theaters, and baths. The Council at Jamnia was dissolved and outlawed- a 
minor and powerless Council was permitted at Lydda, but public instruction 
in the Law was prohibited on pain of death. Several rabbis were executed 
for disobeying this injunction. Akiba, now ninety-five, insisted on teaching 
his pupils; he was imprisoned for three years, but taught even in jail- he w^ 



549 


CHAP. XXV) ROME AND JUDEA 

tried and condemned, and died, we are told, with the basic tenet of Judaism 
on his lips: “Hear, O Israel! The Lord is our God, the Lord is one.” 

Though Hadrian’s decrees were softened by Antoninus Pius, the Jews 
did not for centuries recover from the disaster of Bar Cocheba’s revolt. 
From this moment they entered their Middle Ages, abandoning all secular 
learning except medicine, renouncing every form of Hellenism, and taking 
comfort and unity only from their rabbis, their mystic poets, and their 
Law. No other people has ever known so long an exile, or so hard a fate. 
Shut out from their Holy City, the Jews were compelled to surrender it first 
to paganism, then to Christianity. Scattered into every province and beyond, 
condemned to poverty and humiliation, unbefriended even by philosophers 
and saints, they retired from public affairs into private study and worship, 
passionately preserving the words of their scholars, and preparing to write 
them down at last in the Talmuds of Babylonia and Palestine. Judaism hid 
in fear and obscurity while its offspring, Christianity, went out to conquer 
the world. 




BOOK V 

THE YOUTH OF CHRISTIANITY 

4 B.C.-A.D. 325 



CHRONOLOGICAL TABLE 

All dates except the first are a.d.; and all dates before 150 are uncertain. 


B.c. 4: Birth of Christ 
A.D.30: Crucifixion; conversion of Paul 
45-47: First mission of Paul 
50-53: Second mission of Paul 
51: Paul in Athens 
53-57; Third mission of Paul 
58-60: Paul imprisoned by Felix 
61-64: Paul imprisoned in Rome 

64: Neronic persecution; d. of Peter 
and Paul 

65: Linus, Bishop of Rome 
77: Cletus, Bishop of Rome 
60-100; The Four Gospels 

89: Clement I, Bishop of Rome 
90; The Johannine epistles 
98: Evaristus, Bishop of Rome 
106; Alexander I, Bishop of Rome 
1 16: Xystus I, Bishop of Rome 
126: Telesphorus, Bishop of Rome 
137: Hyginus, Bishop of Rome 
141: Pius I, Bishop of Rome 
150: Justin’s First Apology 
156: Anicetus, Bishop of Rome 
166; Martyrdom of Polycarp 
175: Eleutherius, Bishop of Rome 
177: Martyrdoms at Lyons 
178: Irena'eus, Bishop of Lyons 
190; Victor I, Bishop of Rome 
193: Pertinax and Didius Julianus, em- 
perors 

193-21 1 ; Septimius Severus, emperor 

194: Montanus; Clement of Alexandria 
200: Tertullian’s Liber Apologeticus 
202: Zephyrinus, Bishop of Rome 
203: Arch of Sept. Severus; Origen 
205-70; Plotinus 
211-17: Caracalla 

212: Caracalla extends citizenship 
215; Baths of Caracalla; Mani 
218; Callistus I, Bishop of Rome 
218-22: Elagabalus, emperor 

222: Urban I, Bishop of Rome 
222-35: Alexander Severus, emperor 
228: Murder of Ulpian 
235-58: Maximinus, emperor 
236: Fabian, Bishop of Rome 
238-44: Gordianus I, II, III, emperors 
241-72; Shapur I, King of Persia 
244-49: Philip the Arab, emperor 

248: Cyprian, Bishop of Carthage; 

Origen’s Contra Celsum 


249-51: Decius, emperor; Diophantus, 
mathematician 

251; Cornelius, Bishop of Rome 
251-53: Gallus, emperor 
253-60: Valerianus, emperor 
253-68: Galhenus, emperor 

254; Marcomanni raid north Italy 
255; Shapur invades Syria 
257: Edict of Valerian against Christians 
259; Goths overrun Asia Minor 
260; First edict of toleration 
260-66: Odenathus at Palmyra 
266-73: Zenobia and Longinus at Palmyra 
268-70: Claudius II, emjreror 
270-75: Aurelian, emperor 
271: Barbarians invade Italy 

275- 76; Tacitus, emperor 

276- 82: Probus, emperor 

282-83: Carus, Carinus, Numerianus, em- 
perors 

284-305: Diocletian, emperor 
286-305: Maximianus co-Augustus 

292: Galerius and Constantins, Caesars 
295: Baths of Diocletian 
296: Marcellinus, Bishop of Rome 
301 : Price Edict of Diocletian 
303-11: Diocletian persecution 

306; Constantine becomes a Caesar 
307: Maxenrius and Maximian, Augusti; 
basilica of Maxentius 
307-09: Marcellus 1, Bishop of Rome 
307-10: Lactantius’ Divinae Institutiones 
307-13: Constantine and Licinius, Augusti 
309-10: Eusebius, Bishop of Rome 

312: Battle of the Mulvian Bridge; Edict 
of Alilan (?) 

313: Eusebius’ Church History 

Constantine and Licinius divide the 
Empire 

314: Council of Arles 
314-36; Sylvester I, Bishop of Rome 
315: Arch of Constantine 
323: Licinius defeated at Adrianople 
3^4'37' Constantine sole emperor 
325; Council of Nicaea 
326: Constantine kills son, nephew, and 
wife 

330: Constantinople made the capital 
337: Death of Constantine 



CHAPTER XXVI 


Jesus 

4 B.C.-A.D. 30 


I. THE SOURCES 

D id Christ exist? Is the life story of the founder of Christianity the 
product of human sorrow, imagination, and hope— a myth comparable 
to the legends of Krishna, Osiris, Attis, Adonis, Dionysus, and Mithras? 
Early in the eighteenth century the circle of Bolingbroke, shocking even 
Voltaire, privately discussed the possibility that Jesus had never lived. Vol- 
ney propounded the same doubt in his Ruins of Empire in 1791. Napoleon, 
meeting the German scholar Wieland in 1 808, asked him no petty question 
of politics or war, but did he believe in the historicity of Christ? ^ 

One of the most far-reaching activities of the modem mind has been the 
“Higher Criticism” of the Bible— the mounting attack upon its authenticity 
and veracity, countered by the heroic attempt to save the historical foundations 
of Christian faith; the results may in time prove as revolutionary as Christianity 
itself. The first engagement in this two-hundred-year war was fought in silence 
by Hermann Reimarus, professor of Oriental languages at Hamburg; on his 
death in 1768 he left, cautiously unpublished, a 1400-page manuscript on the 
life of Christ. Six years later Gotthold Lessing, over the protests of his friends, 
published portions of it as the Wolfenbiittel Fragments. Reimarus argued that 
Jesus can only be regarded and understood not as the founder of Christianity, 
but as the final and dominant figure in the mystical eschatology of the Jews— 
i.e., Christ thought not of establishing a new religion, but of preparing men for 
the imminent destruction of the world, and God’s Last Judgment of all souls. 
In 1 796 Herder pointed out the apparently irreconcilable difference between the 
Christ of Matthew, Mark, and Luke, and the Christ of the Gospel of St. John. 
In 1828 Heinrich Paulus, summarizing the life of Christ in 1192 pages, proposed 
a rationalistic interpretation of the miracles— i.e., accepted their occurrence but 
ascribed them to natural causes and powers. In an epoch-marking Life of Jesus 
(1835-36) David Strauss rejected this compromise; the supernatural elements 
in the Gospels, he thought, should be classed as myths, and the actual career of 
Christ must be reconstructed without using these elements in any form. Strauss’s 
massive volumes made Biblical criticism the storm center of German thought 
for a generation. In the same year Ferdinand Christian Baur attacked the Epistles 

553 



554 


CAESAR AND CHRIST 


(chap. XXVI 

of Paul, rejecting as unauthentic all but those to the Galatians, Corinthians, and 
Romans. In 1 840 Bruno Bauer began a series of passionately controversial works 
aiming to show that Jesus was a myth, the personified form of a cult that evolved 
in the second century from a fusion of Jewish, Greek, and Roman theology. 
In 1863 Ernest Renan’s Life of Jems, alarming millions with its rationalism and 
charming millions with its prose, gathered together the results of German criti- 
cism, and brought the problem of the Gospels before the entire educated world. 
The French school reached its climax at the end of the century in the Abbe 
Loisy, who subjected the New Testament to such rigorous textual analysis 
that the Catholic Church felt compelled to excommunicate him and other “Mod- 
ernists.” Meanwhile the Dutch school of Pierson, Naber, and Matthas carried 
the movement to its farthest point by laboriously denying the historical reality 
of Jesus. In Germany Arthur Drews gave this negative conclusion its definitive 
exposition (1906); and in England W. B. Smith and J. M. Robertson argued to 
a like denial. The result of two centuries of discussion seemed to be the annihila- 
tion of Christ. 

What evidence is there for Christ’s existence? The earliest non-Christian 
reference occurs in Josephus’ Antiquities of the Jews (a.d. 93? ) : 

At that time lived Jesus, a holy man, if man he may be called, for 
he performed wonderful works, and taught men, and joyfully re- 
ceived the truth. And he was followed by many Jews and many 
Greeks. He was the Messiah.^ 

There may be a genuine core in these strange lines; but the high praise 
given to Christ by a Jew uniformly anxious to please either the Romans or 
the Jews— both at that time in conflict with Christianity— renders the passage 
suspect, and Christian scholars reject it as almost certainly an interpolation.® 
There are references to “Yeshu’a of Nazareth” in the Talmud, but they 
are too late in date to be certainly more than counterechoes of Christian 
thought.^ The oldest known mention of Christ in pagan literature is in a 
letter of the younger Pliny (ca. 1 10),® asking the advice of Trajan on the 
treatment of Christians. Five years later Tacitus ® * described Nero’s perse- 
cution of the Chrestiani in Rome, and pictured them as already (a.d. 64) 
numbering adherents throughout the Empire; the paragraph is so Tacitean in 
style, force, and prejudice that of all Biblical critics only Drews questions 
its authenticity.'^ Suetonius (ca. 125) mentions the same persecution,® and 
reports Claudius’ banishment (ca. 52) of “Jews who, stirred up by Christ 
[impdsore Chresto], were causing public disturbances,” ® the passage accords 
well with the Acts of the Apostles, which mentions a decree of Claudius 
that “the Jews should leave Rome.” These references prove the existence 


Quoted on p. 281. 



JESUS 


555 


CHAP. XXVl) 

of Christians rather than of Christ; but unless we assume the latter we are 
driven to the improbable hypothesis that Jesus was invented in one genera- 
tion; moreover, we must suppose that the Christian community in Rome 
had been established some years before 52, to merit the attention of an 
imperial decree. About the middle of this first century a pagan named 
Thallus, in a fragment preserved by Juhus Africanus,^^ argued that the 
abnormal darkness alleged to have accompam’ed the death of Christ was 
a purely natural phenomenon and coincidence; the argument took the 
existence of Christ for granted. The denial of that existence seems never to 
have occurred even to the bitterest gentile or Jewish opponents of nascent 
Christianity. 

The Christian evidence for Christ begins with the letters ascribed to 
Saint Paul. Some of these are of uncertain authorship; several, antedating 
A.D. 64, are almost universally accounted as substantially genuine. No one 
has questioned the existence of Paul, or his repeated meetings with Peter, 
James, and John; and Paul enviously admits that these men had known 
Christ in the flesh.^" The accepted epistles frequently refer to the Last Sup- 
per and the crucifixion.^'* 

Matters are not so simple as regards the Gospels. The four that have come 
do’wn to us are survivors from a much larger number that once circulated 
among the Christians of the first two centuries. Our Enghsh term gospel 
(Old English godspel, good news) is a rendering of the Greek euangelion, 
which is the opening word of Mark, and means “glad tidings”— that the 
Messiah had come, and the Kiingdom of God was at hand. The Gospels of 
Matthew, Mark, and Luke are “synoptic”: their contents and episodes allow 
of being arranged in parallel columns and “viewed together.” They were 
written in the Greek koine of popular speech, and were no models of gram- 
mar or hterary finish; nevertheless, the directness and force of their simple 
style, the vivid power of their analogies and scenes, the depth of their 
feeling, and the profound fascination of the story they tell give even the 
rude originals a unique charm, immensely enhanced for the English world 
by the highly inaccurate but lordly version made for King James. 

The oldest extant copies of the Gospels go back only to the third century. 
The original compositions were apparently written between a.d. 60 and 120, 
and were therefore exposed to two centuries of errors in transcription, and to 
possible alterations to suit the theology or aims of the copyist’s sect or time. 
Christian writers before 100 quote the Old, but never the New, Testament. The 
only reference to a Christian gospel before 150 is in Papias, who, about 135, 
reports an unidentified “John the Elder” as saying that Mark had composed his 
gospel from memories conveyed to him by Peter.*® Papias adds; “Matthew 



CAESAR AND CHRIST 


556 


(chap. XXVI 


transcribed in Hebrew the Logia”— apparently an early Aramaic collection of the 
sayings of Christ. Probably Paul had some such document, for though he men- 
tions no gospels he occasionally quotes the direct words of Jesus.* Criticism gen- 
erally agrees in giving the Gospel of Mark priority, and in dating it between 65 and 
70. Since it sometimes repeats the same matter in different forms,^® it is widely be- 
lieved to have been based upon the Logia, and upon another early narrative 
which may have been the original composition of Mark himself. Our Gospel of 
Mark was apparently circulated while some of the apostles, or their immediate 
disciples, were still alive; it seems unlikely, therefore, that it differed substantially 
from their recollection and interpretation of Christ.^'^ We may conclude, with 
the brilliant but judicious Schweitzer, that the Gospel of Mark is in essentials 
“genuine history.” 

Orthodox tradition placed Matthew’s Gospel first. Irenaeus describes it as 
originally composed in “Hebrew”— i.e., Aramaic; but it has come down to us only 
in Greek. Since in this form it apparently copies Mark, and probably also the 
Logia, criticism inclines to ascribe it to a disciple of Matthew rather than to the 
“publican” himself; even the most skeptical students, however, concede to it as 
early a date as a.d. 85-90.®® Aiming to convert Jews, Matthew relies more than 
the other evangelists on the miracles ascribed to Jesus, and is suspiciously eager 
to prove that many Old Testament prophecies were fulfilled in Christ. Never- 
theless, it is the most moving of the four Gospels, and must be ranked among 
the unconscious masterpieces of the world’s literature. 

The Gospel according to St. Luke, generally assigned to the last decade of the 
first century, announces its desire to co-ordinate and reconcile earlier accounts 
of Jesus, and aims to convert not Jews but gentiles. Very probably Luke was 
himself a gentile, the friend of Paul, and the author of the Acts of the Apostles.®^ 
Like Matthew he borrows much from Mark.®® Of the 661 verses in the received 
text of Mark over 600 are reproduced in Matthew, and 3 50 in Luke, mostly word 
for word.®® Many passages in Luke that are not in Mark occur in Matthew 
again nearly verbatim; apparently Luke borrowed these from Matthew, or Luke 
and Matthew took them from a common source, now lost. Luke works up these 
candid borrowings with some literary skill; Renan thought this Gospel the most 
beautiful book ever written.®^ 

The Fourth Gospel does not pretend to be a biography of Jesus; it is a pres- 
entation of Christ from the theological point of view, as the divine Logos or 
Word, creator of the world and redeemer of mankind. It contradicts the synoptic 
gospels in a hundred details and in its general picture of Christ.®® The half -Gnostic 
character of the work, and its emphasis on metaphysical ideas, have led many 
Christian scholars to doubt that its author was the apostle John.®® Experience 
suggests, however, that an old tradition must not be too quickly rejected- our 
ancestors were not all fools. Recent studies tend to restore the Fourth Gospel 

• In 1897 and 1903 Grenfell and Hunt discovered in the ruins of Oxyrhynchus in Eavot 
twelve fragments of logia loosely corresponding to passages in the Gospels. These’papvn are 
not older than the third centurt-, but they may be copies of older manuscripts 



JESUS 


557 


CHAP. XXVl) 

to a date near the end of the first century. Probably tradition was correct in 
assigning to the same author the “Epistles of John”; they speak the same ideas 
in the same style. 

In summary, it is clear that there are many contradictions between one 
gospel and another, many dubious statements of history, many suspicious 
resemblances to the legends told of pagan gods, many incidents apparently 
designed to prove the fulfillment of Old Testament prophecies, many pas- 
sages possibly aiming to establish a historical basis for some later doctrine 
or ritual of the Church. The evangelists shared with Cicero, Sallust, and 
Tacitus the conception of history as a vehicle for moral ideas. And presum- 
ably the conversations and speeches reported in the Gospels were subject to 
the frailties of illiterate memories, and the errors or emendations of copyists. 

All this granted, much remains. The contradictions are of minutiae, not 
substance; in essentials the synoptic gospels agree remarkably well, and 
form a consistent portrait of Christ. In the enthusiasm of its discoveries the 
Higher Criticism has applied to the New Testament tests of authenticity 
so severe that by them a hundred ancient worthies— e.g., Hammurabi, David, 
Socrates— would fade into legend.* Despite the prejudices and theological 
preconceptions of the evangelists, they record many incidents that mere in- 
ventors would have concealed— the competition of the apostles for high places 
in the Kingdom, their flight after Jesus’ arrest, Peter’s denial, the failure of 
Christ to work miracles in Galilee, the references of some auditors to his 
possible insanity, his early uncertainty as to his mission, his confessions of 
ignorance as to the future, his moments of bitterness, his despairing cry on 
the cross; no one reading these scenes can doubt the reality of the figure 
behind them. That a few simple men should in one generation have invented 
so powerful and appealing a personality, so lofty an ethic and so inspiring 
a vision of human brotherhood, would be a miracle far more incredible than 
any recorded in the Gospels. After two centuries of Higher Criticism the 
outlines of the life, character, and teaching of Christ, remain reasonably 
' clear, and constitute the most fascinating feature in the history of Western 
man. 


II. THE GROWTH OF JESUS 

Both Matthew and Luke assign Jesus’ birth to “the days when Herod 
was king of Judea” ^^—consequently before 3 b.c. Luke, however, describes 

* Sa)^ a great Jewish scholar, perhaps too strongly: “If we had ancient sources like those in 
the Gospels for the history of Alexander or Caesar, we should not cast any doubt upon them 
whatsoever.”— Klausner, J., From Jesus to Foul, 260. 



CAESAR AND CHRIST 


558 


(chap. XXVI 


Jesus as “about thirty years old” when John baptized him “in the fifteenth 
year of Tiberius” i.e., a.d. 28-29; '^his would place Christ’s birth in the 
year 2-1 b.c. Luke adds that “in those days there went out a decree of Caesar 
Auo-ustus that all the world should be taxed . . . when Quirinius was 

O 

governor of Syria.” Quirinius is known to have been legate in Syria between 
A.D. 6 and 12; Josephus notes a census by him in Judea, but ascribes it to a.d. 
6-7;^® we have no further mention of this census. Tertulhan^ records a 
census of Judea by Satuminus, governor of Syria 8-7 b.c.; if this is the census 
that Luke had in mind, the birth of Christ would have to be placed before 
6 B.c. We have no knowledge of the specific day of his birth. Clement of 
Alexandria (ca. 200) reports diverse opinions on the subject in his day, 
some chronologists dating the birth April 19, some May 20; he himself 
assigned it to November 17, 3 b.c. As far back as the second century the 
Eastern Christians celebrated the Nativity on January 6. In 354 some West- 
ern churches, including those of Rome, commemorated the birth of Christ 
on December 25; this was then erroneously calculated as the winter solstice, 
on which the days begin to lengthen; it was already the central festival of 
Mithraism, the natalis invicti soils, or birthday of the unconquered sun. The 
Eastern churches clung for a time to January 6, and charged their Western 
brethren with sun worship and idolatry, but by the end of the fourth cen- 
tury December 25 had been adopted also in the East.®® 

Matthew and Luke place the birth of Christ in Bethlehem, five miles 
south of Jerusalem; thence, they tell us, the family moved to Nazareth in 
Galilee. Mark makes no mention of Bethlehem, but merely names Christ 
“Jesus of Nazareth.” * His parents gave him the quite common name Yeshu’a 
(our Joshua), meaning “the help of Yahveh”; the Greeks made this into 
lesoiis, the Romans into lesiis. 

He was apparently one of a large family, for his neighbors, marveling at 
his authoritative teaching, asked, “Where did he get this wisdom, and the 
power to do these wonders? Is he not the carpenter’s son? Is not his mother 
named Mary, and are not his brothers named James, Joseph, Simon, and 
Judas? And do not his sisters live here among us?” ®i Luke tells the story 
of the Annunciation with some literary art, and puts into the mouth of 
Miriam-Mary-that Magnificat which is one of the great poems embedded 
in the New Testament. 

Next to her son, Mary is the most touching figure in the narrative: rearing 
him through all the painful joys of motherhood, proud of his youthful learn- 
ing, wondering later at his doctrine and his claims, wishing to withdraw him 

• Critics suspect Matthew and Luke of choosing Bethlehem to strengthen the claim that 
Jesus was the Messiah, and descended, as Jewish prophecy required, from David— whose 
fanuly had dwelt in Bethlehem; but the suspicion falls far short of proof. 



CHAP. XXVl) JESUS 559 

from the exciting throng of his followers and bring him back to the healing 
quiet of his home (“thy father and I have sought thee sorrowing”), help- 
lessly witnessing his crucifixion, and receiving his body into her arms; if 
this is not history it is supreme literature, for the relations of parents and 
children hold deeper dramas than those of sexual love. The tales later circu- 
lated, by Celsus and others, about Mary and a Roman soldier are by critical 
consent “clumsy fabrications.” Not so awkward are the stories, chiefly 
contained in the apocryphal or uncanonical gospels, about the birth of Christ 
in a cave or stable, the adoration of the shepherds and the Magi, the massacre 
of the innocents, and the flight into Egypt; the mature mind will not resent 
this popular poetry. The virgin birth is not mentioned by Paul or John; 
and Matthew and Luke, who tell of it, trace Jesus back to David through 
Joseph, by conflicting genealogies; apparently the behef in the virgin birth 
rose later than that in the Davidic descent. 

The evangelists tell us little of Christ’s youth. When he was eight days 
old he was circumcized. Joseph was a carpenter, and the occupational 
heredity usual in that age suggests that Jesus followed that pleasant trade for 
a time. He knew the craftsmen of his village, and the landlords, stewards, 
tenants, and slaves of his rural surroundings; his speech is studded with them. 
He was sensitive to the natural beauties of the countryside, to the grace 
and color of flowers, and the silent fruitfulness of trees. The story of his 
questioning the scholars in the temple is not incredible; he had an alert and 
curious mind, and in the Near East a boy of twelve already touches maturity. 
But he had no formal education. “How is it,” his neighbors asked, “that this 
man can read when he has never gone to school.^” He attended the syna- 
gogue, and heard the Scriptures with evident delight; the Prophets and the 
Psalms above all sank deep into his memory, and helped to mold him. Per- 
haps he read also the books of Daniel and Enoch, for his later teaching was 
shot through with their visions of the Messiah, the Last Judgment, and the 
coming Kingdom of God. 

The air he breathed was tense with religious excitement. Thousands of 
Jews awaited anxiously the Redeemer of Israel. Magic and witchcraft, 
demons and angels, “possession” and exorcism, miracles and prophecies, 
divination and astrology were taken for granted everywhere; probably 
the story of the Magi was a necessary concession to the astrological convic- 
tions of the age.^^ Thaumaturgists— wonder-workers— toured the towns. On 
the annual journeys that all good Palestinian Jews made to Jerusalem for 
the Passover festival, Jesus must have learned something of the Essenes, and 
their half -monastic, almost Buddhistic, life; * possibly he heard also of a sect 

• Ashoka had sent his Buddhist missionaries as far west as Egypt and Gyrene; 35 very likely, 
therefore, to the Near East. 



560 CAESAR AND CHRIST (CHAP. XXVI 

called “Nazarenes,” who dwelt beyond the Jordan in Peraea, rejected Tem- 
ple worship, and denied the binding character of the Law.®® But the experi- 
ence that aroused him to religious fervor was the preaching of John, the 
son of Mary’s cousin Elizabeth. 

Josephus tells John’s story in some detail.®'^ We tend to picture the Baptist 
as an old man; on the contrary, he was apparently of the same age as Jesus. 
Mark and Matthew describe him as garbed in haircloth, living on dried 
locusts and honey, standing beside the Jordan, and calling people to repent- 
ance. He shared the asceticism of the Essenes, but differed from them in 
holding one baptism to be enough; his name “the Baptist” may be a Greek 
equivalent of “Essene” (bather).®® To his rite of symbohc purification John 
added a menacing condemnation of hypocrisy and loose living, warned 
sinners to prepare themselves for the Last Judgment, and proclaimed the 
early coming of the Kingdom of God.®® If all Judea should repent and be 
cleansed of sin, said John, the Messiah and the Kingdom would come at once. 

In or shortly after “the fifteenth year of Tiberius,” says Luke, Jesus came 
down to the Jordan to be baptized by John. This decision, by a man now 
“about thirty years old,” attested Christ’s acceptance of John’s teaching; 
his own would be essentially the same. His methods and character, however, 
were different; he would himself never baptize anyone,*^ and he would 
live not in the wilderness but in the world. Soon after this meeting Herod 
Antipas, tetrarch (“ruler of four cities”) of Galilee, ordered the imprison- 
ment of John. The Gospels ascribe the arrest to John’s criticism of Herod’s 
acts in divorcing his wife and marrying Herodias while she was still the wife 
of his half brother Philip. Josephus attributes the arrest to Herod’s fear that 
John was fomenting a pohtical rebellion in the guise of a religious reforma- 
tion.^® Mark^® and Matthew tell here the story of Salome, Herodias’ 
daughter, who danced so alluringly before Herod that he offered her any 
reward she might name. At her mother’s urging, we are told, she asked for 
the head of John, and the tetrarch reluctantly accommodated her. There 
is nothing in the Gospels about Salome loving John, nor anything in Josephus 
about her share in John’s death. 


III. THE MISSION 

When John was imprisoned Jesus took up the Baptist’s work, and began 
to preach the coming of the Kingdom.-*® He “returned to Galilee,” says 
Luke, “and taught in the synagogues.” We have an impressive picture of 
the young idealist taking his turn at reading the Scriptures to the congre- 
gation at Nazareth, and choosing a passage from Isaiah; 



JESUS 


CHAP. XXVl) 


561 


The spirit of the Lord is upon me, because he hath anointed me to 
preach glad tidings to the poor; he hath sent me to heal the broken- 
hearted, to preach deliverance to captives, and recovery of sight to 
the bhnd, to set the down-trodden free."*^ 

“The eyes of everyone in the synagogue,” Luke adds, “were fixed upon him. 
And he began by saying to them, ‘This passage of Scripture has been ful- 
filled here in your hearing today.’ And they all spoke well of him, and were 
astonished at the winning words that fell from his bps.”'*® When the news 
came that John had been beheaded, and his followers sought a new leader, 
Jesus assumed the burden and the risk, at first retiring cautiously to quiet 
villages, always refraining from political controversy, then more and more 
boldly proclaiming the gospel of repentance, behef, and salvation. Some of 
his hearers thought he was John risen from the dead.'‘® 

It is difficult to see him objectively, not only because the evidence is 
derived from those who worshiped him, but even more because our own 
moral heritage and ideals are so closely bound up with him and formed 
on his example that we feel injured in finding any flaw in his character. His 
religious sensitivity was so keen that he condemned severely those who 
would not share his vision; he could forgive any fault but unbelief. There 
are in the Gospels some bitter passages quite out of key with what else we 
are told about Christ. He seems to have taken over without scrutiny the 
harshest contemporary notions of an everlasting hell where unbelievers and 
unrepentant sinners would suffer from inextinguishable fire and insatiable 
worms.®^ He tells without protest how the poor man in heaven was not per- 
mitted to let a single drop of water fall upon the tongue of the rich man in 
hell.®^ He counsels nobly, “Judge not, that ye be not judged,” but he cursed 
the men and cities that would not receive his gospel, and the fig tree that 
bore no fruit.®^ He may have been a bit harsh to his mother.®® He had the 
puritan zeal of the Hebrew prophet rather than the broad cahn of the Greek 
sage. His convictions consumed him; righteous indignation now and then 
blurred his profound humanity; his faults were the price he paid for that 
passionate faith which enabled him to move the world. 

For the rest he was the most lovable of men. We have no portrait of him, 
nor do the evangelist^ describe him; but he must have had some physical 
comeliness, as well as spiritual magnetism, to attract so many women as well 
as men. We gather from stray words ^ that, like other men of that age and 
land, he wore a tunic under a cloak, had sandals on his feet, and probably a 
cloth headdress falling over his shoulders to shield him from the sun.®® Many 
women sensed in him a sympathetic tenderness that aroused in them an un- 
stinted devotion. The fact that only John tells the story of the woman taken 



CAESAR AND CHRIST 


562 


(chap. XXVI 


in adultery is no argument against its truth; it does not help John’s theology, 
and is completely in character with Christ.* Of like beauty, and hardly 
within the inventive powers of the evangelists, is the account of the prostitute 
who, moved by his ready acceptance of repentant sinners, knelt before him, 
anointed his feet with precious myrrh, let her tears fall upon them, and dried 
them with her hair; of her Jesus said that her sins were forgiven “because 
she loved much.” We are told that mothers brought their children to be 
touched by him, and “he took the children in his arms, laid his hands upon 
them, and blessed them.” 

Unlike the prophets, the Essenes, and the Baptist, he was no ascetic. He 
is represented as providing abundant wine for a marriage feast, as living with 
“publicans and sinners,” and receiving a Magdalene into his company. He 
was not hostile to the simple joys of life, though he was unbiologically harsh 
on the desire of a man for a maid. Occasionally he partook of banquets in the 
homes of rich men. Generally, however, he moved among the poor, even 
among the almost untouchable Amhaarez so scorned and shunned by Sad- 
ducees and Pharisees alike. Realizing that the rich would never accept him, 
he built his hopes upon an overturn that would make the poor and humble 
supreme in the coming Kingdom. He resembled Caesar only in taking his 
stand with the lower classes, and in the quality of mercy; otherwise what a 
world of outlook, character, and interests separated them! Caesar hoped to 
reform men by changing institutions and laws; Christ wished to remake 
institutions, and lessen laws, by changing men. Caesar too was capable of 
anger, but his emotions were always under the control of his clear-eyed 
intellect. Jesus was not without intellect; he answered the tricky questions 
of the Pharisees with almost a lawyer’s skill, and yet with wisdom; no one 
could confuse him, even in the face of death. But his powers of mind were 
not intellectual, did not depend upon knowledge; they were derived from 
keenness of perception, intensity of feeling, and singleness of purpose. He 
did not claim omniscience; he could be surprised by events; only his earnest- 
ness and enthusiasm led him to overestimate his capacities, as in Nazareth and 
Jerusalem. That his powers were nevertheless exceptional seems proved by 
his miracles. 

Probably these were in most cases the result of suggestion— the influence 
of a strong and confident spirit upon impressionable souls. His presence was 
itself a tonic; at his optimistic touch the weak grew strong and the sick were 
made well The fact that like stories have been told of other characters in 
legend and history does not prove that the miracles of Christ were myths. 

* John, vn, 52 f. The episode is found also in some old manuscripts of Mark and Luke; it 
was expunged from later texts, perhaps through fear of encouraging immorality .56 



JESUS 


CHAP. XXVl) 


563 


With a few exceptions they are not beyond belief; similar phenomena may 
be observed almost any day at Lourdes, and doubtless occurred in Jesus’ 
time at Epidaurus and other centers of psychic healing in the ancient world; 
the apostles too would work such cures. The psychological nature of the 
miracles is indicated by two features: Christ himself attributed his cures to 
the “faith” of those whom he healed; and he could not perform miracles 
in Nazareth, apparently because the people there looked upon him as “the 
carpenter’s son,” and refused to believe in his unusual powers; hence his 
remark that “a prophet is not without honor, save in his own country, and 
in his own house.” We are told of Mary Magdalene that “seven demons 
had been driven out of her”; i.e., she suffered from nervous diseases and 
seizures (the word recalls the theory of “possession”) ; these seemed to abate 
in the presence of Jesus; therefore she loved him as one who had restored 
her to life, and whose nearness was indispensable to her sanity. In the case 
of Jairus’ daughter Christ said frankly that the girl was not dead but asleep 
—perhaps in a cataleptic state; in calling upon her to awake he used not his 
wonted gentleness but the sharp command, “Little girl, get up!”®^ This 
is not to say that Jesus considered his miracles to be purely natural phe- 
nomena; he felt that he could work them only through the help of a divine 
spirit within him. We do not know that he was wrong, nor can we yet set 
limits to the powers that lie potential in the thought and -will of man. Jesus 
himself seems to have experienced a psychical exhaustion after his miracles. 
He was reluctant to attempt them, forbade his followers to advertise them, 
reproved men for requiring a “sign,” and regretted that even his apostles 
accepted him chiefly because of the “wonders” he performed. 

These men were hardly of the type that one would have chosen to re- 
mold the world. The Gospels realistically differentiate their characters, and 
honestly expose their faults. They were frankly ambitious; to quiet them 
Jesus promised that at the Last Judgment they would sit upon twelve thrones 
and judge the twelve tribes of Israel.®^ When the Baptist was imprisoned 
one of his followers, Andrew, attached himself to Jesus, and brought with 
him his brother Simon, whom Christ called Cephas— “the rock”; the Greeks 
translated the name into Petros. Peter is a thoroughly human figure, im- 
pulsive, earnest, generous, jealous, at times timid to the point of a forgivable 
cowardice. He and Andrew were fishermen on the Lake of Galilee; so were 
the two sons of Zebedee— James and John; these four forsook their work 
and their families to become an inner circle about Christ. Matthew was the 
collector of customs at the frontier town of Capernaum; he was a “pub- 
lican’ —i.e., a man engaged in public or state business, therefore in this case 
serving Rome, and hated by every Jew who longed for freedom. Judas 
of Kerioth was the only one of the apostles who did not come from Galilee. 



CAESAR AND CHRIST 


564 


(chap. XXVI 


The Twelve pooled their material possessions, and entrusted Judas with 
their common funds. As they followed Christ in his missionary wandering 
they lived on the country, talring their food now and then from the fields 
they passed, and accepting the hospitality of converts and friends. In addi- 
tion to the Twelve Jesus appointed seventy-two others as disciples, and 
sent two of them to each town that he intended to visit. He bade them 
“carry no purse, nor wallet, nor shoes.” Kindly and pious women joined 
the apostles and disciples, contributed to their support, and performed for 
them those solicitous domestic functions which are the supreme consola- 
tion of male life. Through that little band, lowly and letterless, Christ sent 
his gospel into the world. 


rV. THE GOSPEL 

He taught with the simplicity required by his audiences, with interesting 
stories that insinuated his lessons into the understanding, with pungent aphor- 
isms rather than with reasoned argument, and with similes and metaphors 
as brilliant as any in literature. The parable form that he used was cus- 
tomary in the East, and some of his fetching analogies had come down to 
him, perhaps unconsciously, from the prophets, the psalmists, and the 
rabbis; nevertheless, the directness of his speech, the vivid colors of his 
imagery, the warm sincerity of his nature lifted his utterances to the most 
inspired poetry. Some of his sayings are obscure, some seem at first sight 
unjust,®" some are sharp with sarcasm and bitterness; nearly all of them are 
models of brevity, clarity, and force. 

His starting point was the Gospel of John the' Baptist, which itself went 
back to Daniel and Enoch; historia non facit saltum. The Kingdom of 
Heaven was at hand, he said; soon God would put an end to the reign 
of wickedness on earth; the Son of Man would come “on the clouds of 
the sky” to judge all humanity, Uving and dead.®® The time for repentance 
was running out; those who repented, lived justly, loved God, and put their 
faith in his messenger would inherit the Kingdom, would be raised to power 
and glory in a world at last freed from all evil, suffering, and death. 

As these ideas were familiar to his hearers, Christ did not define them 
clearly, and many difficulties obscure his conception now. What did he 
mean by the Kingdom? A supernatural heaven? Apparently not, for the 
apostles and the early Christians unanimously expected an earthly king- 
dom. This was the Jewish tradition that Christ inherited; and he taught his 
followers to pray to the Father, “Thy Kingdom come, thy will be done on 



CHAP. XXVl) JESUS 565 

earth as it is in heaven.” Only after that hope had faded did the Gospel of 
John make Jesus say, “My kingdom is not of this world.” Did he mean 
a spiritual condition, or a material utopia? At times he spoke of the King- 
dom as a state of soul reached by the pure and sinless “the Kingdom of 
God is within you”; at other times he pictured it as a happy future so- 
ciety in which the apostles would be rulers, and those who had given or 
suffered for Christ’s sake would receive a hundredfold reward.^® He seems 
to have thought of moral perfection as only metaphorically the Kingdom, 
as the preparation and price for the Kingdom, and as the condition of all 
saved souls in the Kingdom when realized.'^^ 

When would the Kingdom come? Soon. “I will drink no more of the 
fruit of the vine until I drink it new in the Kingdom of God.” “Ye shall 
not have gone over the cities of Israel,” he told his followers, “till the Son 
of Man is come.” Later he deferred it a bit: “There be some standing 
here that shall not taste of death till they see the Son of Man coming in 
the Kingdom”; and “this generation shall not pass till all these things be 
done.” In more poHtic moments he warned his apostles: “Of that day 
and hour knoweth no man, no, not the angels in heaven, neither the Son, 
but the Father.” Certain signs would precede the coming: “wars and 
rumors of war . . . nation will rise against nation . . . there will be 
famines and earthquakes . . . many shall be offended, and . . . shall hate 
one another. Many false prophets will appear, many will be misled by them; 
and because of the increase of wickedness most men’s love will grow cold.” ’’’’ 
Sometimes Jesus made the advent of the Kingdom depend and wait upon 
the conversion of man to God and justice; usually he made its coming an 
act of God, a sudden and miraculous gift of divine grace. 

Many have interpreted the Kingdom as a communist utopia, and have 
seen in Christ a social revolutionist.^® The Gospels provide some evidence 
for this view. Christ obviously scorned the man whose chief purpose in life 
is to amass money and luxuries.'^® He promised hunger and woe to the rich 
and filled, and comforted the poor with Beatitudes that pledged them the 
Kingdom. To the rich youth who asked what he should do besides keeping 
the commandments, Christ answered: “Sell your property, give your money 
to the poor, and . . . follow me.” Apparently the apostles interpreted 
the Kingdom as a revolutionary inversion of the existing relationships be- 
tween the rich and the poor; we shall find them and the early Christians 
forming a communistic band which “had all things in common.” The 
charge on which Jesus was condemned was that he had plotted to make 
himself “King of the Jews.” 

But a conservative can also quote the New Testament to his purpose. 



566 CAESAR AND CHRIST (CHAP. XXVI 

Christ made a friend of Matthew, who continued to be an agent of the 
Roman power; he uttered no criticism of the civil government, took no 
known part in the Jewish movement for national liberation, and counseled 
a submissive gentleness hardly smacking of political revolution. He advised 
the Pharisees to “render unto Caesar the things that are Caesar’s, and unto 
God the things that are God’s.” His story of the man who, before going 
on a journey, “called on his slaves, and put his property in their hands,” 
contains no complaint against interest or slavery, but takes these institu- 
tions for granted. Christ apparently approves of the slave who invested the 
ten minas (f6oo) that the master had entrusted to him, and made ten more; 
he disapproves of the slave who, left with one mina, held it in unproductive 
safekeeping against the master’s return; and he puts into the master’s mouth 
the hard saying that “to him who has, more will be given, and from him 
who has nothing, even that which he has will be taken away” an ex- 
cellent summary of market operations, if not of world history. In another 
parable workers “grumbled at their employer,” who paid as much to one 
who had labored an hour as to those who had toiled all day; Christ makes 
the employer answer: “Is it not lawful for me to do what I will with my 
own?” Jesus does not seem to have thought of ending poverty; “the poor 
ye have always with you.” He takes for granted, like all ancients, that a 
slave’s duty is to serve his master well; “blessed is the slave whom his master, 
returning, finds performing his charge.” ®® He is not concerned to attack 
existing economic or political institutions; on the contrary, he condemns 
those ardent souls who would “take the Kingdom of Heaven by storm.” ®'^ 
The revolution he sought was a far deeper one, without which reforms 
could only be superficial and transitory. If he could cleanse the human heart 
of selfish desire, cruelty, and lust, utopia would come of itself, and all those 
institutions that rise out of human greed and violence, and the consequent 
need for law, would disappear. Since this would be the profoundest of all 
revolutions, beside which all others would be mere coups d’etat of class 
ousting class and exploiting in its turn, Christ was in this spiritual sense the 
greatest revolutionist in history. 

His achievement lay not in ushering in a new state, but in outlining an 
ideal morality. His ethical code was predicated on the early comincr of the 
Kingdom,®® and was designed to make men worthy of entering it. Hence 
the Beatitudes, with their unprecedented exaltation of humility, poverty, 
gentleness, and peace; the counsel to turn the other cheek, and be as little 
children (no paragons of virtue! ) ; the indifference to economic provision, 
property, government; the Reference of celibacy to marriage; the com- 
mand to abandon all family ties: these were not rules for ordinary life, they 



JESUS 


CHAP. XXVl) 


567 


were a semimonastic regimen fitting men and women for election by God 
into an imminent Kingdom in which there would be no law, no marriage, 
no sexual relations, no property, and no war. Jesus praised those who “leave 
house, or parents, or brethren, or wife, or children,” even those “who make 
themselves eunuchs, for the Kingdom of Heaven’s sake”; obviously this 
was intended for a devoted religious minority, not for a continuing society. 
It was an ethic limited in purpose but universal in its scope, for it applied 
the conception of brotherhood and the Golden Rule to foreigners and ene- 
mies as well as to neighbors and friends. It visioned a time when men would 
worship God not in temples but “in spirit and truth,” in every deed rather 
than in passing words. 

Were these moral ideas new? Nothing is new except arrangement. The 
central theme of Christ’s preaching— the coming Judgment and Kingdom 
—was already a century old among the Jews. The Law had long since in- 
culcated brotherhood: “Thou shalt love thy neighbor as thyself,” said 
Leviticus; even “the stranger that dwelleth with you shall be unto you as 
one bom among you, and thou shalt love him as thyself,” Exodus had 
commanded the Jews to do good to their enemies.®^ Jeremiah ®® and Isaiah®® 
had counseled, “Let him give his cheek to him that smiteth him.” The 
prophets, too, had ranked a good life above aU ritual; and Isaiah®^ and 
Hosea ®® had begun to change Yahveh from a Lord of Hosts into a God of 
Love. Hillel, like Confucius, had phrased the Golden Rule. We must not 
hold it against Jesus that he inherited and used the rich moral lore of his 
people. 

For a long time Christ thought of himself purely as a Jew, sharing the 
ideas of the prophets, continuing their work, and preaching like them only 
to Jews. In dispatching his disciples to spread his gospel he sent them only 
to Jewish cities; “go not into the way of the gentiles, nor into the city of 
the Samaritans”;®® hence the apostles, after his death, hesitated to bring 
the Good News to the “heathen” world.®^ When he met the Samaritan 
woman at the well he told her, “Salvation is of the Jews” ®®— though we 
must not judge him from words perhaps put into his mouth by one who 
was not present, and who wrote sixty years after the event. When a Ca- 
naanite woman asked him to heal her daughter, he at first refused, saying 
“I was sent only to the lost sheep of Israel.” ®® He told the leper whom he 
had cured to “go to the priest and . . . offer the gift that Moses pre- 
scribed.” ^®® “Do everything that the scribes and Pharisees tell you, and 
observe it all; but do not do as they do.” In suggesting modifications and 
mitigations of the Judaic Law Jesus, like Hillel, did not think that he was 
overthrowing it; “I came not to destroy the Law of Moses but to fulfill 



568 CAESAR AND CHRIST (cHAP. XXVI 

it.” “It is easier for heaven and earth to pass away than for one tittle * 
of the Law to fail.” f 

Nevertheless, he transformed everything by the force of his character 
and his feeling. He added to the Law the injunction to prepare for the 
Kingdom by a life of justice, kindliness, and simplicity. He hardened the 
Law in matters of sex and divorce,^®'’ but softened it toward a readier for- 
giveness,“® and reminded the Pharisees that the Sabbath was made for man.^” 
He relaxed the code of diet and cleanliness, and omitted certain fasts. He 
brought rehgion back from ritual to righteousness, and condemned con- 
spicuous prayers, showy charities, and ornate funerals. He left the im- 
pression, at times, that the Judaic Law would be abrogated by the coming 
of the Kingdom.^^® 

Jews of all sects except the Essenes opposed his innovations, and especially 
resented his assumption of authority to forgive sins and to speak in the name 
of God. They were shocked to see him associate with the hated employees 
of Rome, and with women of low repute. The priests of the Temple and 
the members of the Sanhedrin watched his activity with suspicion; like 
Herod with John, they saw in it the semblance or cover of a political revolu- 
tion; they feared lest the Roman procurator should accuse them of neg- 
lecting their responsibility for maintaining social order. They were a bit 
frightened by Christ’s promise to destroy the Temple, and not quite sure 
that it was only a metaphor. For his part Christ denounced them in sharp 
and bitter terms: 

The scribes and Pharisees . . . put heavy loads of the Law upon 
men’s shoulders, but they will not lift a finger to move them. They 
do everything they do to have men see it. They wear wide Scripture 
texts as charms, and large tassels, and they like the best places at din- 
ners and the front seats in the synagogues. . . . But alas for you 
hypocritical scribes and Pharisees . . . you blind guides . . . blind 
fools! ... You let the weightier matters of the Law go— justice, 
mercy, and integrity. ... You clean the outside of the cup and the 
dish, but inside they are full of greed and self-indulgence. . . . You 
hypocritical scribes and Pharisees are like whitewashed tombs! 

Outwardly you appear to men to be upright, but within you are full 
of hypocrisy and wickedness. ... You are descended from the mur- 
derers of the prophets. Go on and fill up the measure of your fore- 
fathers’ guilt! You serpents! You brood of snakes! How can you 

• A vowel point placed over a Hebrew consonant. 

t These passages may have bety interpolated by Judaic Christians anxious to discredit 
Paul; 104 but we may not arbitranly assume so. 



JESUS 


569 


CHAP. XXVl) 

escape being sentenced to the pit? . . . The publicans and the harlots 

go into the Kingdom of God before you.^®® 

Was Jesus just to the Pharisees? Probably there were some among them 
who deserved this castigation, many who, like numberless Christians a few 
centuries later, substituted outward piety for inward grace. But there were 
also many Pharisees who agreed that the Law should be softened and hu- 
manized.^^® Very likely a large number of the sect were sincere men, rea- 
sonably decent and honorable, who felt that the ceremonial laws neglected 
by Jesus should be judged not in themselves but as part of a code that served 
to hold the Jews together, in pride and decency, amid a hostile world. Some 
of the Pharisees sympathized with Jesus, and came to warn him that plots 
were being made to kill him.^^^ Nicodemus, one of the defenders of Jesus, 
was a rich Pharisee. 

The final break came from Jesus’ growing conviction and clear announce- 
ment that he was the Messiah. At first his followers had looked upon him 
as the successor to John the Baptist; gradually they came to believe that 
he was the long-awaited Redeemer who would raise Israel out of Roman 
bondage and establish the reign of God on earth. “Lord,” they asked him, 
“will you at this time restore the kingdom to Israel?” He put them off 
by saying, “It is not for you to know the times and seasons which the Father 
has set”; and he gave an equally vague answer to emissaries of the Baptist 
who asked him, “Art thou he that was to come?” To turn his followers 
from their conception of him as a political Messiah, he repudiated all claim 
to Davidic descent.”® Gradually, however, the intense expectations of his 
followers, and his discovery of his unusual psychic powers, seem to have 
persuaded him that he had been sent by God, not to restore the sovereignty 
of Judea, but to prepare men for the reign of God on earth. He did not 
(in the synoptic Gospels) identify or equate himself with the Father. “Why 
do you call me good? ” he asked; “there is none good but one, that is God.” 
“Not as I will,” he prayed in Gethsemane, “but as thou wUt.” He took 
the phrase “Son of Man,” which Daniel had made a synonym for the 
Messiah, used it at first without clearly meaning himself, and ended by apply- 
ing it to himself in such statements as “The Son of Man is master of the 
Sabbath” which seemed high blasphemy to the Pharisees. He called 
God “Father” at times in no exclusive sense; occasionally, however, he 
spoke of “my Father,” apparently signifying that he was the son of God 
in an especial manner or degree.^^® For a long time he forbade the disciples 
to call him the Messiah; but at Caesarea Philippi he approved Peter’s recog- 
nition of him as “the Christ, the Son of the living God.” When, on the 
last Monday before his death, he approached Jerusalem to make a final ap- 



CAESAR AND CHRIST 


570 


(chap. XXVI 


peal to the people, “the whole throng of his disciples” greeted him with 
the words, “Blessed is the king who comes in the name of the Lord”; and 
when some Pharisees asked him to reprove this salutation, he answered, “I 
teU you, if they keep silence, the stones will cry out.” The Fourth Gospel 
reports that the crowd hailed him as “King of Israel.” Apparently his 
followers still thought of him as a political Messiah, who would overthrow 
the Roman power and make Judea supreme. It was these acclamations that 
doomed Chnst to a revolutionist’s death. 


V. DEATH AND TRANSFIGURATION 

The Feast of the Passover was at hand, and great numbers of Jews were 
gathering in Jerusalem to offer sacrifice in the Temple. The outer court of 
the shrine was noisy with vendors selling doves and other sacrificial animals, 
and with money-changers offering locally acceptable currency for the 
idolatrous coins of the Roman realm. Visiting the Temple on the day after 
his entry into the city, Jesus was shocked by the clamor and commercial- 
ism of the booths. In a burst of indignation he and his followers overthrew 
the tables of the money-changers and the dove merchants, scattered their 
coins on the ground, and with “a scourge of rods” drove the traders from 
the court. For several days thereafter he taught in the Temple, unhin- 
dered; but at night he left Jerusalem and stayed on the Mount of Olives, 
fearing arrest or assassination. 

The agents of the government— civil and ecclesiastical, Roman and Jew- 
ish— had kept watch on him probably from the time when he had taken 
up the mission of John the Baptist. His failure to secure a large following 
had inclined them to ignore him; but his enthusiastic reception in Jerusalem 
seems to have set the Jewish leaders wondering whether this excitement, 
working upon the emotional and patriotic Passover throngs, might flare 
up into an untimely and futile revolt against the Roman power, and issue 
in the suppression of all self-government and religious freedom in Judea. 
The high priest called a meeting of the Sanhedrin, and expressed the opinion 
“that one man should die for the people, instead of the whole nation being 
destroyed.” The majority agreed with him, and the Council ordered the 
arrest of Christ, 

Some news of this decision seems to have reached Jesus, perhaps through 
members of the Sanhedrin minority. On the fourteenth day of the Jewish 
month of Nisan (our April third), probably in the year 30,* Jesus and his 

• There is much dispute about the duration of Christ’s mission, and the j-ear of his death. 
We have seen Luke dating Christ’s baptism in the year 28-29. The chronology of Paul, as based 



CHAP. XXVl) JESUS 571 

apostles ate the Seder, or Passover supper, in the home of a friend in Jerusa- 
lem. They looked to the Master to free himself by his miraculous powers; 
he, on the contrary, accepted his fate, and perhaps hoped that his death 
would be received by God as a sacrificial atonement for the sins of his peo- 
ple.^^^ He had been informed that one of the Twelve was conspiring to 
betray him; and at this last supper he openly accused Judas Iscariot.* In 
accord with Jewish ritual Jesus blessed (in Greek, eucharistisae) the wine 
that he gave the apostles to drink; and then they sang together the Jewish 
ritual song Hall el P’’ He told them, says John, that he would be with them 
“only a httle longer. ... I give you a new command: Love one another. 
. . . Let not your hearts be troubled. Believe in God and believe in me. 
In my Father’s house are many mansions ... I go to prepare a place for 
you.” It seems quite credible that in so solemn a moment he should ask 
them to repeat this supper periodically (as Jewish custom required), in 
commemoration of him; and not improbable that, with Oriental intensity 
of feeling and imagery, he asked them to think of the bread they ate as his 
body, and of the wine they drank as his blood. 

That night, we are told, the little band hid in the Garden of Gethsemane, 
outside Jerusalem. There a detachment of Temple police found them, 
and arrested Jesus. He was taken first to the house of Annas, a former high 
priest, then to that of Caiaphas; according to Mark the “Council”— prob- 
ably a committee of the Sanhedrin— had already gathered there. Various 
witnesses testified against him, especially recalling his threat to destroy the 
Temple. When Caiaphas asked him whether he was “the Messiah, the Son 
of God,” Jesus is reported to have answered “I am he.” In the morning 
the Sanhedrin met, found him guilty of blasphemy (then a capital crime), 
and decided to bring him before the Roman procurator, who had come to 
Jerusalem to keep an eye on the Passover crowds. 

Pontius Pilate was a hard man, who would later be summoned to Rome, 
accused of extortion and cruel ty,^®^ and removed from office. Nevertheless, 
it did not seem to him that this mild-mannered preacher was a real danger 
to the state. Almost playfully he asked Jesus, “Are you the King of the 
Jews?” According to Matthew Jesus answered, “Yes.” Such details, re- 
ported presumably from hearsay and long after the event, must be held 
suspect; if we accept the text we must conclude that Jesus had resolved to 
die, and that Paul’s theory of atonement had some support in Christ. John 

upon his own statements in Galatians i-n, the chronology of the procurators w^ho tried him, 
and the tradition of his death in 64, apparently require the daring of Paul’s conversion in 31. 
Cf. Chapter XXVII. 

• Many arguments have been raised against the story of Judas.i^s but they are uncon- 
Tincing.12* 




572 CAESAR AND CHRIST (CHAP. XXVI 

quotes Jesus as adding: “For this I was born ... to give testimony for 
the truth,” “What is truth?” asked the procurator a question perhaps 
due to the metaphysical propensities of the Fourth Gospel, but well re- 
vealing the chasm between the sophisticated and cynical culture of the 
Roman and the warm and trustful idealism of the Jew. In any case, after 
Christ’s confession, the law required conviction, and Pilate reluctantly is- 
sued the sentence of death. 

Crucifixion was a Roman, not a Jewish, form of punishment. It was usu- 
ally preceded by scourging, which, carried out thoroughly, left the body 
a mass of swollen and bloody flesh. The Roman soldiers crowned Christ 
with a wreath of thorns, mocking his royalty as “King of the Jews,” and 
placed upon his cross an inscription in Aramaic, Greek, and Latin: lesus 
N azarathaeus Rex loudaeorum. Whether or not Christ was a revolutionist 
he was obviously condemned as one by Rome; Tacitus, too, understood the 
matter so.^®^ A small crowd, such as could gather in Pilate’s courtyard, had 
called for Christ’s execution; now, however, as he climbed the hill of Gol- 
gotha, “he was followed by a great crowd of the people,” says Luke,^®® 
and of women who beat their breasts and mourned for him. Quite clearly 
the condemnation did not have the approval of the Jewish people. 

All who cared to witness the horrible spectacle were free to do so; the 
Romans, who thought it necessary to rule by terror, chose, for capital 
offenses by other than Roman citizens, what Cicero called “the most cruel 
and hideous of ' tortures.” The offender’s hands and feet were bound 
(seldom nailed) to the wood; a projecting block supported the backbone 
or the feet; unless mercifully killed, the victim would linger there for two 
or three days, suffering the agony of immobility, unable to brush away the 
insects that fed upon his naked flesh, and slowly losing strength until the 
heart failed and brought an end. Even the Romans sometimes pitied the vic- 
tim, and offered him a stupefying drink. The cross, we are told, was 
raised “at the third hour”— i.e., at nine in the morning. Mark reports that 
two robbers were crucified with Jesus, and “reviled him”; Luke assures 
us that one of them prayed to him.^*® Of all the apostles only John was 
present; with him were three Marys— Christ’s mother, her sister Mary, and 
Mary Magdalene; “there were also some women watching from a dis- 
tance.” Following the Roman custom,^^® the soldiers divided the gar- 
ments of the dying men; and as Christ had but one, they cast lots for it. 
Possibly we have here an interpolated remembrance of Psalm xxii, r 8: “They 
part my garments among them, and cast lots upon my vesture.” The same 
Psalm begins with the words: “My God, my God, why hast thou forsaken 
me?”— and this is the desperately human utterance that Mark and Matthew 
attribute to the dying Christ. Can it be that in those bitter moments the 



CHAP. XXVl) JESUS 573 

great faith that had sustained him before Pilate faded into black doubt? 
Luke, perhaps finding such words repugnant to the theology of Paul, substi- 
tutes for them: “Father, into thy hands I commend my spirit”— which in 
turn echoes Psalm xxxi, 5 with suspicious accuracy. 

A soldier, pitying Christ’s thirst, held up to his mouth a sponge soaked 
in sour wine. Jesus drank, and said, “It is consummated.” At the ninth hour 
—at three in the afternoon— he “cried out with a loud voice, and gave up 
the ghost.” Luke adds— again revealing the sympathy of the Jewish popu- 
lace— that “all the people that came together to that sight , . . smote their 
breasts and returned” to the town.^^^ Two kindly and influential Jews, hav- 
ing secured Pilate’s permission, took the body down from the cross, em- 
balmed it with aloes and myrrh, and placed it in a tomb. 

Was he really dead? The two robbers beside him were still alive; their 
legs were broken by the soldiers so that the weight of the body would hang 
upon the hands, constricting the circulation and soon stopping the heart. 
This was not done in Jesus’ case, though we are told that a soldier pierced 
his breast with a lance, drawing forth first blood and then lymph. Pilate 
expressed surprise that a man should die after six hours of crucifixion; he 
gave his consent to Christ’s removal from the cross only when the centurion 
in charge assured him of Christ’s death. 

Two days later Mary Magdalene, whose love of Jesus partook of that 
nervous intensity which characterized all her feelings, visited the tomb 
with “Mary the mother of James, and Salome.” They found it empty. 
“Frightened and yet overjoyed,” they ran to tell the news to the disciples. 
On the way they met one whom they thought to be Jesus; they bowed 
down before him and clasped his feet. We can imagine the hopeful in- 
credulity with which their report was greeted; the thought that Jesus had 
triumphed over death, and had thereby proved himself Messiah and Son 
of God, filled the “Galileans” with such excitement that they were ready 
for any miracle and any revelation. That same day, we are told, Christ ap- 
peared to two disciples on the road to Emmaus, talked with them, and ate 
with them; for a long time “they were prevented from recognizing him”; 
but when “he took the bread and blessed it . . . their eyes were opened, 
and they knew him, and he vanished from them.” The disciples went back 
to Galilee, and soon thereafter “saw him and bowed down before him, 
though some were in doubt.” While they were fishing they saw Christ 
join them; they cast their nets, and drew in a great haul.^^^ 

Forty days after his appearance to Mary iMagdalene, says the beginning of 
the Book of Acts, Christ ascended physically into heaven. The idea of a 
saint being so “translated” into the sky in body and life was familiar to the 



574 CAESAR AND CHRIST (CHAP. XXVI 

Jews; they told it of Moses, Enoch, Ehjah, and Isaiah. The Master went as 
mystically as he had come; but most of the disciples seem to have been 
sincerely convinced that he had, after his crucifixion, been with them in 
the flesh. “They went back with great joy to Jerusalem,” says Luke,^^® 
“and were constantly in the Temple, blessing God.” 



CHAPTER ZXVII 


The Apostles 

A.D. 30-95 


1 . PETER 

C HRISTIANITY arose out of Jewish apocalyptic— esoteric revelations 
of the coming Kingdom; it derived its impetus from the personality 
and vision of Christ; it gained strength from the belief in his resurrection, 
and the promise of eternal life; it received doctrinal form in the theology 
of Paul; it grew by the absorption of pagan faith and ritual; it became a 
triumphant Church by inheriting the organizing patterns and genius of 
Rome. 

The apostles were apparently unanimous in believing that Christ would 
soon return to establish the Kingdom of Heaven on earth.* “The end of 
all things is near,” says the first epistle of Peter; “be serious and collected, 
therefore, and pray.” ® “Children,” says the first epistle of John, “it is the 
last hour. You have heard that Antichrist was coming, and many Antichrists” 
(Nero, Vespasian, Domitian?) “have indeed appeared. So we may be sure 
that it is the last hour.” * The belief in the Messianic mission, bodily resur- 
rection, and earthly return of Christ formed the basic faith of early Chris- 
tianity. This creed did not prevent the apostles from continuing to accept 
Judaism. “Day after day,” says Acts, “they all went regularly to the Tem- 
ple”; ® they obeyed the dietetic and ceremonial laws; ® they proclaimed 
their faith at first only to Jews, and often preached it in the Temple courts.' 

* Our chief guide for this period is the Acts of the Apostles. It is universally agreed that 
this book and the Third Gospel are by the same author; but there is far less general acceptance 
of the tradition that both were written by Luke, the gentile friend of Paul. As Acts makes no 
mention of Paul’s death, the original work may have been composed about 63 as an effort to 
mollify Roman hostility to Christianity and Paul; but it was probably expanded by a later 
hand. It abounds in the supernatural, but its basic narrative may be accepted as history .1 In 
the second century various apocryphal “Acts” and “Epistles” rounded out with legend the 
story of the Apostles after Christ. These “Acts” were the historical novels of the age, not 
necessarily attempts at deception; the Church rejected them, but the pious accepted them, 
and increasingly confused them with history. 

Of the seven letters ascribed in the New Testament to the Twelve Apostles, criticism in- 
clines to accept the first of Peter as substantially genuine,® to identify the author of the 
epistles of John with the disputed author of the Fourth Gospel; and to reject the rest as of 
doubtful authenticity. 


575 



576 CAESAR AND CHRIST (cHAP. XXVII 

They believed that they had received from Christ or the Holy Spirit 
miraculous powers of inspiration, healing, and speech. Many sick and infirm 
persons came to them; some were cured, says Mark,® by anointing with oil 
—always a popular treatment in the East. The author of Acts draws a touch- 
ing picture of the trustful communism in which these early Christians lived: 

There was but one heart and soul in the multitude who had become 
believers, and not one of them claimed anything that belonged to him 
as his own, but they shared everything they had with one another. 

. . . No one among them was in any want, for any who owned lands 
or houses would sell them and bring the proceeds and put them at the 
disposal of the Apostles; then they were shared with everyone in pro- 
portion to his need.® 

As the number of proselytes increased, the apostles, by a laying on of hands, 
ordained seven deacons to administer the affairs of the community. For 
some time the Jewish authorities tolerated the sect as small and harmless; 
but as the “Nazarenes” multiplied in a few years from 120 to 8000,^® the 
priests became alarmed. Peter and others were arrested and questioned by 
the Sanhedrin; the Sadducees wished to condemn them to death, but a 
Pharisee named Gamaliel— probably the teacher of Paul— advised a sus- 
pended judgment; as a compromise the prisoners were flogged and released. 
A little later (a.d. 30?) Stephen, one of the ordained deacons, was sum- 
moned before the Sanhedrin on the charge that he had “used abusive lan- 
guage about Moses and about God.” He defended himself with reckless 
vehemence: 

You stubborn people, with heathen hearts and ears, you are always 
opposing the Holy Spirit, just as your forefathers did! Which of the 
prophets did not your forefathers persecute? They killed the men 
who foretold the coming of the righteous one, whom you have now 
betrayed and killed— you who had the Law given you by angels, and 
did not obey itH® * 

The Sanhedrin, in a rage, had him dragged outside the city and stoned to 
death. A young Pharisee named Saul aided the attack; thereafter he went 
from house to house in Jerusalem, seized adherents of “the Way,” and put 
them in jail.^® 

The Jewish converts of Greek name and culture, who had had Stephen as 
their leader, fled to Samaria and Antioch, where they established strong Chris- 
tian communities. Most of the apostles, apparently spared in this persecution 


* The speeches of Stephen, Peter, Paul, and others in Acts may have been invented by the 
author, after the general custom of ancient historians. 



THE APOSTLES 


577 


CHAP. XXVIl) 

because they still observed the Law, remained in Jerusalem with the Judaic 
Christians. While Peter carried the Gospel to the towns of Judea, James “the 
Just,” “the brother of the Lord,” became the head of the now reduced and 
impoverished church in Jerusalem. James practiced the Law in all its severity, 
and rivaled the Essenes in asceticism; he ate no meat, drank no wine, had only 
one garment, and never cut his hair or beard. For eleven years, under his guid- 
ance, the Christians were left undisturbed. About 41 another James, the son 
of Zebedee, was beheaded; Peter was arrested, but escaped. In 62 James the Just 
was himself put to death. Four years later the Jews revolted against Rome. The 
Jerusalem Christians, too convinced of the coming “end of the world” to care 
about politics, left the city and established themselves in pagan and pro-Roman 
Pella, on the farther bank of the Jordan. From that hour Judaism and Chris- 
tianity parted. The Jews accused the Christians of treason and cowardice, and 
the Christians hailed the destruction of the Temple by Titus as a fulfillment of 
Christ’s prophecy. Mutual hatred enflamed the two faiths, and wrote some of 
their most pious literature. 

Thereafter Judaic Christianity waned in number and power, and yielded the 
new religion to be transformed by the Greek mind. Gahlee, where Christ had 
lived nearly all his life, and where the Magdalene and the other women who had 
been among the first to follow him were now lost in obscurity, turned a deaf 
ear to the preachers who proclaimed the Nazarene as the Son of God. The Jews, 
who thirsted for liberty, and reminded themselves daily that “the Lord is One,” 
were repelled by a Messiah who ignored their struggle for independence, and 
were scandalized by the announcement that a god had been bom in a cave or 
stable in one of their villages. Judaic Christianity survived for five centuries in 
a little group of Syriac Christians called Ebionim (“the poor”), who practiced 
Christian poverty and the full Jewish Law. At the end of the second century the 
Chmrch condemned them as heretics. 

Meanwhile the apostles and disciples had spread the Good News, chiefly 
among the Jews of the Dispersion,^* from Damascus to Rome. Philip made 
converts in Samaria and Caesarea, John developed a strong church in 
Ephesus, and Peter preached in the cities of Syria. Like most of the apos- 
tles, Peter took a “sister” with him on his missions to serve as his wife and 
aide.*® He healed the sick so successfully that at Samaria a magician, Simon 
Magus, offered him money for a share in his mysterious powers. At Joppa 
he raised Tabitha from apparent death; at Caesarea he won a Roman cen- 
turion to Christianity. A vision, says the Book of Acts, convinced him that 
he should accept pagan as well as Jewish converts; and from this time for- 
ward, with -some amiable vacillations, he contented himself with baptizing, 
rather than also circumcizing, non-Jewish proselytes. We feel some of the 
ardor of these early missionaries in the first epistle of Peter: 



578 


CAESAR AND CHRIST 


(chap. XXVIl 

Peter, an apostle of Jesus Qirist, to those [Christian Jews] who 
arc scattered as foreigners over Pontus, Galatia, Cappadocia, Asia, 
and Bithynia . . . God bless you and give you perfect peace. . . . 

My dearly beloved, I pray you as aliens and exiles, to live upright 
lives among the gentiles so that . . . they may, from observing the 
uprightness of your conduct, come to praise God. . . . Submit to 
all human authority for the Master’s sake. . . .’ Live like free men, 
but do not make your freedom an excuse for wrong doing. . . . 
Servants, be submissive to your masters, and perfectly respectful to 
them; not only to those who are kind and considerate, but also to 
those who are unreasonable. You married women, likewise, must be 
submissive to your husbands, so that any who refuse to believe . . . 
may be won over when they see how chaste and submissive you are. 

You must not adopt the external attractions of arranging your hair 
or wearing jewelry; you must be a quiet and gentle spirit. You mar- 
ried men also must be considerate to your wives; show deference to 
women as the weaker sex, sharing the gift of life with you. . . . Re- 
turn not evil for evil. . . . Above all keep your love for one another 
strong, for love covers a multitude of sins.^® 

We do not know when and by what stages Peter made his way to Rome. 
Jerome {ca. 390) dates his first arrival there as early as 42. The tradition 
that he played a leading role in establishing the Christian community in 
the capital has survived all criticism.” Lactantius speaks of Peter’s coming 
to Rome in Nero’s reign; probably the apostle visited the city on divers 
occasions. He free and Paul in prison labored as rivals to win converts there, 
until both of them suffered martyrdom, perhaps in the same year 64.^® Origen 
reports that Peter “was crucified head downward, for he had asked that 
he might suffer that way,” perhaps hoping that in that position death 
would come sooner, or (said the opinion of the faithful) holding himself 
unworthy to die in the same manner as Christ. Ancient texts testify that his 
wife was killed with him and that he had to see her led to execution.®^ A 
later story named Nero’s Circus, on the Vatican field, as the place of his 
death. Over the site the Cathedral of St. Peter rose, and claimed to enshrine 
his bones. 

His missions in Asia Minor and Rome must have helped to preserve many 
Judaic elements in Christianity. Through him and the other apostles it 
inherited Jewish monotheism, puritanism, and eschatology. Through them 
and Paul the Old Testament became the only Bible that first-century Chris- 
tianity knew. Till 70 Christianity was preached chiefly in synagogues or 
‘ttnong Jews. The form, ceremony, and vestments of Hebrew worship 
passed dovm into Christian ritual. The Paschal lamb of sacrifice was subli- 



THE APOSTLES 


579 


CHAP. XXVIl) 

mated in the Agnus Dez— the expiatory Lamb of God— of the Catholic Mass. 
The appointment of elders {presbyteri, priests) to govern the churches was 
adopted from Jewish methods of administering the synagogue. Many Judaic 
festivals— e.g., Passover and Pentecost— were accepted into the Christian 
calendar, however altered in content and date. The Jewish Dispersion aided 
the rapid dissemination of Christianity; the frequent movement of Jews from 
city to city, and their connections throughout the Empire, co-operated with 
commerce, Roman roads, and the Roman peace, to open a path for the 
Christian faith. In Christ and Peter Christianity was Jewish; in Paul it became 
half Greek; in Catholicism it became half Roman. In Protestantism the Judaic 
element and emphasis were restored. 


n. PAUL 

1. The Persecutor 

The founder of Christian theology was bom at Tarsus, in Cilicia, about 
the tenth year of our era. His father was a Pharisee, and brought up the 
youth in the fervent principles of that sect; the Apostle of the Gentiles never 
ceased to consider himself a Pharisee, even after he had rejected the Judaic 
Law. The father was also a Roman citizen, and transmitted the precious 
franchise to his son. Probably the name Paul was the Greek equivalent of 
the Hebrew Saul, so that both names belonged to the apostle from infancy.^® 
He did not receive a classical education, for no Pharisee would have per- 
mitted such outright Hellenism in his son, and no man with Greek training 
would have written the bad Greek of the Epistles. Nevertheless, he learned 
to speak the language with sufficient fluency to address an Athenian au- 
dience, and he occasionally referred to famous passages in Greek literamre. 
We may beheve that some Stoic theology and ethics passed from the uni- 
versity environment of Tarsus into the Christianity of Paul. So he uses the 
Stoic term pneinna (breath) for what his English translators call spirit. Like 
most Greek cities. Tarsus had followers of the Orphic or other mystery 
religions, who believed that the god they worshiped had died for them, had 
risen frem the grave, and would, if appealed to by lively faith and proper 
rimal, save them from Hades, and share with them his gift of eternal and 
blessed life.-® The mystery reUgions prepared the Greeks for Paul, and 
Paul for the Greeks. 

After the youth had learned the trade of tentmaking, and had received 
instruction in the local synagogue, his father sent him to Jerusalem, where, 
Paul tells us, he was “educated at the feet of Gamahel according to the 



580 CAESAR AND CHRIST (cHAP. XXVn 

Strict manner of the Law.” Gamaliel was reputedly the grandson of Hillel; 
he succeeded Hillel as president of the Sanhedrin, and carried on the tradi- 
tion of interpreting the Law with a lenient regard for the frailty of man- 
kind. Stricter Pharisees were shocked to find him gazing appreciatively even 
upon pagan women.^° He was so learned that the Jews, who keenly honor 
scholarship, called him “the beauty of the Law,” and gave to him first, as 
to only six men after him, the title of rabban, “our master.” From him and 
others Paul learned that shrewd and subtle, sometimes casuistic and sophisti- 
cal, manner of Biblical interpretation which was to disport itself in the 
Talmud. Despite Paul’s initiation into Hellenism he remained to the end 
a Jew in mind and character, uttered no doubt of the Torah’s inspiration, 
and proudly maintained the divine election of the Jews as the medium of 
man’s salvation. 

He describes himself as “insignificant in appearance,” -® and adds: “to 
keep me from being too much elated, a bitter physical affliction was sent 
me”; he does not further specify. Tradition pictured him at fifty as a bent 
and bald and bearded ascetic, with vast forehead, pale face, stem coun- 
tenance, and piercing eyes; Diirer imagined him so in one of the greatest 
drawings of all time; but in truth these representations are literature and art, 
not history. 

His mind was of a type frequent among Jews: penetrating and passionate 
rather than genial and urbane; emotional and imaginative rather than objec- 
tive and impartial; he was powerful in action because he was narrow in 
thought. Even more than Spinoza he was a “God-intoxicated man,” con- 
sumed with religious enthusiasm in the literal sense of this word— holding 
“a god within.” He believed himself divinely inspired, and endowed with 
the ability to work miracles. He was also a practical soul, capable of laborious 
organization, impatiently patient in founding and preserving Christian com- 
munities. As in so many men, his faults and virtues were near allied and 
mutually indispensable. He was impemous and courageous, dogmatic and 
decisive, domineering and energetic, fanatical and creative, proud before 
man and humble before God, violently wrathful and capable of the ten- 
derest love. He advised his followers to “bless them that persecute you,” 
but he could hope that his enemies— “the party of circumcision”— “would 
get themselves emasculated.” He knew his failings, struggled against them, 
and begged his converts to “put up with a little folly from me.” The post- 
script to his first epistle to the Corinthians sums him up: “This farewell I, 
Paul, add in my own hand. A curse upon anyone who has no love for the 
Lord! Lord, come quickly! The blessing of the Lord Jesus be with you! 
My love be with you all.” He was what he had to be to do what he did. 

He began by attacking Christianity in the name of Judaism, and ended 



THE APOSTLES 


CHAP. XXVIl) 


581 


by rejecting Judaism in the name of Christ; at every moment he was an 
apostle. Shocked by Stephen’s disrespect for the Law, he joined in killing 
him, and led the first persecution of Christians in Jerusalem. Hearing that 
the new faith had made converts in Damascus, he obtained authorization 
from the high priest to go there, arrest all “who belonged to the Way,” and 
bring them in chains to Jerusalem (a.d. 31?).^° It may be that the fervor 
of his persecution was due to secret doubts; he could be cruel, but not with- 
out remorse; possibly the vision of Stephen stoned to death, perhaps even 
some youthful glimpse of Golgotha, troubled his memory and his journey, 
and fevered his imagination. As his party neared Damascus, says the Acts, 

a sudden light flashed upon him from heaven, and he fell to the 
ground. Then he heard a voice saying to him, “Saul, Saul, why do 
you persecute me?” “Who are you, sir?” he asked. “I am Jesus,”. . . 
said the voice. . . . Saul’s fellow-travelers stood speechless, for they 
heard the voice but could not see anyone. When he got up from the 
ground and opened his eyes he could see nothing. They had to take 
him by the hand and lead him into Damascus. For three days he could 
not see.®^ 


No one can say what natural processes underlay this pivotal experience 
The fatigue of a long journey, the strength of the desert sun, perhaps a 
stroke of heat lightning in the sky, acting by accumulation upon a frail 
and possibly epileptic body, and a mind tortured by doubt and guilt, may 
have brought to culmination the half-conscious process by which the pas- 
sionate denier became the ablest preacher of Stephen’s Christ. His Greek 
environment in Tarsus had spoken of a Soter or Saviour who redeemed 
mankind; his Jewish lore had told of a Messiah to come; how could he be 
sure that this mysterious and fascinating Jesus, for whom men were ready 
to die, was not the promised one? When, weak and still blind at the end of 
his journey, he felt upon his face the kindly, soothing hands of a converted 
Jew, “something like scales dropped from his eyes, and his sight was re- 
stored; he got up and was baptized, and after taking some food, regained 
his strength.” A few days later he entered the synagogues of Damascus, 
and told their congregations that Jesus was the Son of God. 


2. The Missionary 

The governor of Damascus, urged by the offended Jews, issued an order 
for Paul’s arrest; Paul’s new friends lowered him in a basket over the city 
walls. For three years, he tells us, he preached Christ in the hamlets of Arabia. 
Returning to Jerusalem, he won the forgiveness and friendship of Peter, and 



582 CAESAR AND CHRIST (CHAP. XXVH 

lived with him for a while. Most of the apostles distrusted him, but Barnabas, 
himself a recent convert, gave him a cordial hand, and persuaded the Jerusa- 
lem church to commission its persecutor as a bearer of the Good News that 
the Messiah had come and would soon estabhsh the Kingdom. The Greek- 
speaking Jews to whom he brought the Gospel tried to kill him, and the 
apostles, perhaps fearing that his ardor would endanger them all, sent him 
to Tarsus. 

For eight years he was lost to history in his native city; and perhaps again 
he felt the influence of the mystic salvation theology popular among the 
Greeks. Then Barnabas came and asked his aid in ministering to the church 
at Antioch. Working together (43-44?), they made so many converts that 
Antioch soon led all other cities in the number of its Christians. There for 
the first time the “Behevers,” “Disciples,” “Brethren,” or “Saints,” as they 
had called themselves, received from the pagans, perhaps in scorn, the name 
followers of the Messiah or Anointed One. There too, for the 
first time, gentiles (i.e., people of the gentes or nations) were won to the 
new faith. Most of these were “God-fearers,” predominantly women, who 
had already accepted the monotheism, and in some part the ritual, of the 
Jews. 

The Antioch converts were not as poor as those in Jerusalem; a con- 
siderable minority belonged to the merchant class. With the enthusiasm 
of a youthful and growing movement, they raised a fund to spread the 
Gospel. The elders of the church “laid their hands upon” Barnabas and 
Paul, and sent them out on what history, unduly belittling Barnabas, calls 
the “first missionary journey of Saint Paul” (45-47? ) . They sailed to Cyprus, 
and met with encouraging success among the many Jews of that island. 
From Paphos they took ship to Perga in Pamphyha, and traveled over dan- 
gerous mountain roads to Antioch in Pisidia. The synagogue gave them a 
courteous hearing; but when they began to preach to gentiles as well, the 
orthodox Jews persuaded the municipal ofiicers to banish the missionaries. 
Similar difficulties developed at Iconium; and at Lystra Paul was stoned, 
dragged out of the town, and left for dead. Still “full of the joy of the Holy 
Spirit,” Paul and Barnabas carried the Gospel to Derbe. Then they returned 
by the same route to Perga, and sailed to Syrian Antioch. There they found 
themselves faced by the most crucial problem in the history of Christianity. 

For some leading disciples of Jerusalem, hearing that the two preachers 
were accepting gentile converts without requiring circumcision, had come 
to Antioch “to teach the brethren that unless they were circumcized as Moses 
prescribed, they could not be saved.” To the Jew circumcision was not 
so much a ritual of health as a holy symbol of his people’s ancient covenant 
with God; and the Christian Jew was appalled at the thought of breaking 



THE APOSTLES 


CHAP. XXVIl) 


583 


that covenant. For their part Paul and Barnabas reahzed that if these emis- 
saries had their way, Christianity would never be accepted by any signifi- 
cant number of gentiles; it would remain “a Jewish heresy” (as Heine was 
to call it), and would fade out in a century. They went down to Jerusalem 
(50.^ ) and fought the matter out with the apostles, nearly all of whom were 
still faithful worshipers in the Temple. James was reluctant to consent; 
Peter defended the two missionaries; finally it was agreed that pagan prose- 
lytes should be required only to abstain from immorality and from the 
eating of sacrificial or strangled animals.®^ Apparently Paul eased the way 
by promising financial support for the impoverished community at Jerusa- 
lem from the swelling funds of the Antioch church.®® 

The issue, however, was too vital to be so easily laid. A second group 
of orthodox Jewish Christians came from Jerusalem to Antioch, found Peter 
eating with gentiles, and persuaded him to separate himself, with the con- 
verted Jews, from the uncircumcized proselytes. We do not know Peter’s 
side of this episode; Paul tells us that “he withstood Peter to his face” at 
Antioch,®® and accused him of hypocrisy; perhaps Peter had merely wished, 
like Paul, to be “all things to all men.” 

Probably in the year 50 Paul left on his second missionary journey. He 
had quarreled with Barnabas, who now disappeared from history in his 
native Cyprus. Revisiting his churches in Asia Minor, Paul attached to 
himself at Lystra a young disciple named Timothy, whom he came to love 
with a profound affection that had long been starved for an object. Together 
they went through Phrygia and Galatia as far north as Alexandria Troas. 
Here Paul made the acquaintance of Luke, an uncircumcized proselyte to 
Judaism, a man of good mind and heart, probably the author of the Third 
Gospel and the Book of Acts— both designed to soften the conflicts that 
from the beginning marked the history of Christianity. From Troas Paul, 
Timothy, and another aide, Silas, sailed to Macedonia, for the first time 
touching European soil. At Philippi, where Antony had conquered Brutus, 
Paul and Silas were arrested as disturbers of the peace, were scourged and 
jailed, but were freed on the discovery that they were Roman citizens. Pass- 
ing on to Thessalonica, Paul went to the synagogue, and for three Sabbaths 
preached to the Jews. A few were convinced, and organized a church; others 
roused the town against Paul on the ground that he was proclaiming a new 
king; and his friends had to spirit him away to Beraea during the night. There 
“the Jews received the message with great eagerness”; but the Thessalonians 
came to denounce Paul as an enemy of Judaism, and he took ship for Athens 
(51?), discouraged and alone. 

Here, in the heart of pagan religion, science, and philosophy, he found 
himself quite friendless. There were few Jews to give him a hearing; he 



584 CAESAR AND CHRIST (CHAP. XXVIl 

had to take his stand in the market place, like any modern haranguer of 
city crowds, and compete with a dozen rivals for passing ears. Some lis- 
teners argued with him; some laughed at him, and asked, “What is this rag- 
picker trying to make out?” Several were interested, and led him up to 
the Areopagus, or Hill of Mars, for a quieter hearing. He told them how 
he had noted, in Athens, an altar inscribed “To an Unknown God”; this 
dedication, which probably expressed the desire of the donors to thank, 
appease, or enlist the aid of a god of whose name they were not certain, Paul 
interpreted as a confession of ignorance concerning the nature of God. He 
proceeded with high eloquence: 

Whom therefore ye worship though ye know him not, him I de- 
clare unto you. God, who made the world and all things therein 
. . . dwells not in temples made with hands. ... It is he that giveth 
life and breath unto all. . . . And he made of one blood all the nations 
of mankind . . . that they should seek God, if haply they might feel 
after him, though he be not far from us; for in him we live and move 
and have our being, as certain also of your own poets have said.* 

. . . Forasmuch, then, as we are the offspring of God, we ought not 
to think that the Godhead is like unto gold, or silver, or stone, graven 
by the art and device of man. Howbeit, those past times of ignorance 
God hath overlooked; but now he commandeth all men everywhere 
to repent, because he hath appointed a day wherein he wiU judge 
the world ... by that Man whom he hath ordained; whereof he 
hath given assurance unto all, in that he hath raised him from the 
dead.®* 

It was a brave effort to reconcile Christianity with Greek philosophy.f 
Nevertheless, it impressed only a few; the Athenians had heard too many 
ideas to have much enthusiasm for any. Paul left the city in disappointment 
and went to Corinth, where commerce had gathered a substantial com- 
munity of Jews. He stayed there eighteen months (51-52?), earning his 
living as a tentmaker, and preaching every Sabbath in the synagogue. The 
leader of the synagogue was converted, and so many others that the alarmed 
Jews indicted Paul before the Roman governor, Gallio, on the charge of 
“trying to induce people to worship God in ways that are against the law.” 
Gallio replied: As it is only a question of words and titles and your own 
law, you must look after it yourselves; I will not decide such matters”; 
and he dismissed them from the court. The two parties fell to blows, “but 
Gallio paid no attention.” Paul offered his gospel to the gentiles of Corinth, 
and made many converts among them. Christianity may have seemed to 

• Paul quotes the line from Cleanthes’ Hyym to Zeus, or from Aratus’ Fhmnomena. 

t Perhaps we should credit the speech to the Hellenized author of the Acts. 



THE APOSTLES 


CHAP. XXVIl) 


585 


them an acceptable variation of the mystery faiths that had so often told 
them of resurrected saviors; possibly in accepting it they assimilated it to 
these beliefs, and influenced Paul to interpret Christianity in terms familiar 
to the Hellenistic mind. 

From Corinth Paul went to Jerusalem (53? ) to “salute the church.” Soon, 
however, he was off on his third missionary journey, visiting the Christian 
communities in Antioch and Asia Minor, and reinvigorating them with his 
fervor and confidence. At Ephesus he spent two years, and “did such extraor- 
dinary wonders” that many looked upon him as a miracle-worker, and 
sought to cure ailments by applying to the sick the linens Paul had used. 
The manufacturers of the images that pagan worshipers dedicated in the 
Temple of Artemis found their trade slackening; perhaps Paul had repeated 
here his Athenian indictment of image worship, or idolatry. One Demetrius, 
who made silver models of the great shrine for pious pilgrims, organized a 
protest against Paul and the new faith, and led to the city theater a crowd 
of Greeks whose catchword, repeated for two hours, was “Great is Artemis 
of the Ephesians! ” A local official dissolved the gathering, but Paul thought 
it the better part of valor to leave for Macedonia. 

He spent some happy months with the little congregations he had founded 
in Philippi, Thessalonica, and Beraea. Hearing that dissension and immoral- 
ity were disordering the church at Corinth, he not only reprimanded it in 
several epistles, but went down to it in person (56?) to face his detractors. 
They had accused him of profiting materially from his preaching, laughed 
at his visions, and renewed the demand that all Christians should obey the 
Jewish Law. Paul reminded the turbulent community that he had every- 
where earned his living with the work of his hands; and as to material profit, 
what had he not suffered from his missions?— eight floggings, one stoning, 
three shipwrecks, and a thousand dangers from robbers, patriots, and 
streams.*® Amid this turmoil word was brought him that the “party of the 
circumcision,” apparently violating the Jerusalem agreement, had gone into 
Galatia and demanded of all converts the full acceptance of the Jewish Law. 
He wrote to the Galatians a wrathful epistle in which he broke completely 
with the Judaizing Christians, and declared that men were to be saved not 
by adherence to the Mosaic Law, but by an active faith in Christ as the 
redeeming Son of God. Then, not knowing what sharper tribulations 
awaited him there, he left for Jerusalem, eager to defend himself before 
the Apostles, and wishing to celebrate in the Holy City the ancient feast 
of Pentecost. From Jerusalem, he hoped, he might go to Rome, even to 
Spain, and never rest till every province of the Empire had heard the news 
and promise of the risen Christ. 



586 


CAESAR AND CHRIST 


(chap. XXVH 


5. The Theologian 

The leaders of the mother church gave him “a hearty welcome” (57?); 
but privately they admonished him; 

You see, brother, how many thousand believers there are among 
the Jews, all of them zealous upholders of the Law. They have been 
told that you teach all Jews who live among the heathen to turn away 
from Moses, that you tell them not to circumcize their children, nor 
to observe the old customs. . . . They will be sure to hear that you 
have come. So do what we tell you. We have four men here who are 
under a vow. Join them, undergo the rites of purification with them, 
and pay their expenses. . . . Then everybody will understand that 
there is no truth in the stories told about you, but that you yourself 
observ^e the Law.^^ 

Paul took the advice in good spirit, and went through the rites of purifica- 
tion. But when some Jews saw him in the Temple they raised an outcry 
against him as “the man who teaches everybody everywhere against our 
people and the Law.” A mob seized him, dragged him from the Temple, 
and “were trying to kill him” when a squad of Roman soldiers rescued him 
by arrest. Paul turned to speak to the crowd, and affirmed both his Judaism 
and his Christianity. They shouted for his death. The Roman officer ordered 
him to be flogged, but desisted when he learned of Paul’s Roman citizenship. 
The next day he brought the prisoner before the Sanhedrin. Paul addressed 
it, proclaimed himself a Pharisee, and won some support; but his excited 
opponents again sought to do him violence, and the officer withdrew him 
into the barracks. That night a nephew of Paul came to warn him that forty 
Jews had vowed not to eat or drink until they had killed him. The officer, 
fearing a disturbance that would compromise him, sent Paul in the night to 
the procurator Felix at Caesarea. 

Five days later the high priest and some elders came up from Jerusalem, 
and accused Paul of being “a pest and a disturber of the peace among Jews 
all over the world.” Paul admitted that he was preaching a new religion, 
but added; “I beheve everything that is taught in the Law.” Felix dismissed 
the accusers; nevertheless, he kept Paul under house arrest— accessible to 
friends-for two years (58-60?), hoping, perhaps, for a substantial bribe. 

When Festus succeeded Felix he suggested that Paul should stand trial 
before him at Jerusalem. Fearing that hostile environment, Paul exercised 
his rights as a Roman citzen, and demanded trial before the emperor. King 
Agrippa, passing through Caesarea, gave him another hearing, and judged 



THE APOSTLES 


CHAP. XXVIl) 


587 


him “mad with great learning,” but otherwise innocent; “he might be let 
go,” said Agrippa, “if he had not appealed to the emperor.” Paul was put 
on a trading vessel, which sailed so leisurely that it encountered a winter 
storm before it could reach Italy. Through fourteen days of tempest, we 
are told, he gave crew and passengers an encotiraging example of a man 
superior to death and confident of rescue. The ship broke to pieces on Malta’s 
rocks, but all on board swam safely to shore. Three months later Paul 
arrived in Rome (61.^). ■ 

The Roman authorities treated him leniently, awaiting his accusers from 
Palestine, and Nero’s leisure to hear the case. He was allowed to live in a 
house of his choosing, with a soldier to guard him; he could not move about 
freely, but he could receive whomever he wished. He invited the leading 
Jews of Rome to come to him; they heard him patiently, but when they 
perceived that in his judgment the observance of the Jewish Law was not 
necessary to salvation, they turned away; the Law seemed to them the 
indispensable prop and solace of Jewish life. “Understand, then,” said Paul, 
“that this message of God’s salvation has been sent to the heathen. They 
will listen to it! ” His attimde offended also the Christian community that 
he found in Rome. These converts, chiefly Jews, preferred the Christianity 
that had been brought to them from Jerusalem; they practiced circumcision, 
and were hardly distinguished by Rome from the orthodox Jews; they 
welcomed Peter, but were cold to Paul. He made some converts among 
the gentiles, even in high place; but a bitter sense of frustration darkened 
the loneliness of his imprisonment. 

He found some solace in sending long and tender letters to his distant 
flocks. For ten years now he had written such epistles; there were doubtless 
many more than have come down to us under his name.* They did not come 
directly from his pen; he dictated them, often adding a postscript in his 
own rough hand; he left them apparently unrevised, with all their repetitions, 
obscurities, and bad grammar on their head. Nevertheless, the depth and 
sincerity of their feeling, their angry devotion to a great cause, their pro- 
fusion of noble and memorable speech make them the most forceful and 
eloquent letters in all literature; even Cicero’s charm seems slight beside 
this passionate faith. Here are strong words of love from one to whom his 
churches were his fiercely protected children; violent attacks upon his 
numberless enemies; reprimands to sinners, backsliders, and divisive dis- 
putants; and everywhere tender exhortations. 


• Of these we may regard the letters to the Galatians, Corinthians, and Romans as authentic; 
probably also those to the Thessalonians, Phihppians, Colossians, and Philemon; perhaps even 

the epistle to the Ephesians.^s 



588 


CAESAR AND CHRIST 


(chap. XXVII 

Be filled with thanksgiving. Let the presence of Christ dwell in you, 
a well-spring of abounding wisdom; teach and encourage one another 
with hymns and songs of the spiritual life; make music in your hearts 
in gratitude to God.^* 

Here are great phrases that all Christendom quotes and cherishes: “the letter 
kills, the spirit gives life”;^® “evil communications corrupt good manners’V® 
“to the pure all things are pure”;^’^ “the love of money is the root of all evil.”^® 
Here are frank confessions of his faults, even of his statesmanhke hypocrisies: 

I have made myself everyone’s slave, so as to win over all the more. 

To the Jews I have become like a Jew to win Jews ... to those 
without the Law I have become Hke a man without any law ... I 
have become all things to all men, that I might save some of them. 

I do it all tor the sake of the Good News, that I may share its blessings 
with the rest.^® 

These epistles were preserved, and often publicly read, by the congrega- 
tions to which they were addressed. By the end of the first century many 
of them were widely known; Clement of Rome refers to them in 97, 
Ignatius and Polycarp soon afterwards; gradually they entered into the 
subtlest theology of the Church. Moved by his own somber spirit and 
remorse, and his transforming vision of Christ; influenced perhaps by 
Platonist and Stoic denunciations of matter and the body as evil; recalling, 
it may be, Jewish and pagan customs of sacrificing a “scapegoat” for the 
sins of the people, Paul created a theology of which none but the vaguest 
warrants can be found in the words of Christ: that every man born of woman 
inherits the guilt of Adam, and can be saved from eternal damnation only 
by the atoning death of the Son of God.* Such a conception was more 
agreeable to the pagans than to the Jews. Egypt, Asia Minor, and Hellas 
had long since believed in gods— Osiris, Attis, Dionysus— who had died to 
redeem mankind; such titles as Soter (Savior) and Eleutherios (Deliverer) 
had been applied to these deities; and the word Kyrios (Lord), used by Paul 
of Christ, was the term given in Syrian-Greek cults to the dying and redeem- 
ing Dionysus.®^ The gentiles of Antioch and other Greek cities, never having 

• The ancient Jews shared with the Canaanites, Moabites, Phoenicians, Carthaginians, and 
other peoples the custom of sacrificing a child, even a beloved son, to appease the wrath of 
Heaven. In the course of time a condemned criminal might be substituted. In Babylonia he 
was dressed in royal robes to represent the son of the king, and was then scourged and 
hanged. A similar sacrifice took place in Rhodes at the feast of Cronus. The offering of a 
lamb or kid at the Passover was probably a civilized mitigation of ancient human sacrifice. 
“On the day of atonement,” sap Frazer, “the Jewish high priest laid both his hands on the head 
of a five goat, confessed over it all the iniquities of the children of Israel, and having thereby 
transferred the sins of the people to the beast, sent it away into the wilderness.” 



THE APOSTLES 


CHAP. XXVIl) 


589 


known Jesus in the flesh, could only accept him after the manner of their 
savior gods. “Behold,” said Paul, “I show you a mystery.” 

Paul added to this popular and consoling theology certain mystic con- 
ceptions already made current by the Book of Wisdom and the philosophy 
of Philo. Christ, said Paul, is “the wisdom of God,” the first-bom Son 
of God; “he is before all things, in him all things exist . . . through him 
all things have been created.” He is not the Jewish Messiah who will deliver 
Israel from bondage; he is the Logos whose death will deliver all men. 
Through these interpretations Paul could neglect the actual life and sayings 
of Jesus, which he had not directly known, and could stand on an equality 
with the immediate apostles, who were no match for him in metaphysical 
speculation; he could give to the life of Christ, and to the life of man, h.^gh 
roles in a magnificent drama that embraced all souls and all eternity. More- 
over, he could answer the troublesome questions of those who asked why 
Christ, if very god, had allowed himself to be put to death: Christ had died 
to redeem a world lost to Satan by Adam’s sin; he had to die to break the 
bonds of death and open the gates of heaven to all who should be touched 
by the grace of God. 

Two factors, said Paul, determine who shall be saved by Christ’s death: 
divine election and humble faith. God chooses from all eternity those whom 
he will bless with his grace, and those whom he will damn.®® Nevertheless, 
Paul bestirred himself to awaken faith as a rod to catch God’s grace; only 
through such “assurance of things longed for,” such “confidence in things 
unseen,” can the soul experience that profound change which makes a 
new man, unites the believer with Christ, and allows him to share in the 
fruits of Christ’s death. Good works and the performance of all the 613 
precepts of the Jewish Law will not suffice, said Paul; they cannot remake 
the inner man, or wash the soul of sin. The death of Christ had ended the 
epoch of the Law; now there should no more be Jew and Greek, slave and 
freeman, male and female, for “in union with Christ Jesus you are all one.” 
As to good works combined with faith, Paul never tired of inculcating 
them; and the most famous words ever spoken about love are his own: 

Though I speak with the tongues of men and angels, and have not 
love, I am become as sounding brass or tinkling cymbal. And though 
I have the gift of preaching, and understand all mysteries, and have 
all knowledge; and though I have all faith, so that I can move moun- 
tains; if I have not love I am nothing. And though I give away every- 
thing that I am, and give myself, but do it in pride, not love, it profits 
me nothing. Love is patient and kind. It is not envious or boastful. 

... It does not insist on its rights. ... It never fails. So faith, hope, 
and love endure, these three; and the greatest of these is lov^e.®® 



CAESAR AND CHRIST 


590 


(chap, xxvii 


To sexual love, and marriage, Paul gives the most discouraging toleration. 
One passage suggests, but does not prove, that he was married: “Have 
we not” (he and Barnabas) “a right to take a Christian wife about with 
us, like the rest of the apostles, and the Lord’s brothers, and Peter?”— but 
in another he calls himself single. Like Jesus, he had no sympathy for 
physical desire.®^ He was horrified when he heard of promiscuity and 
perversions.®® “Do you not know,” he asked the Corinthians, “that your 
body is a temple of the Holy Spirit that is within you? . . . Honor God 
with your bodies.” ®^ Virginity is better than marriage, but marriage is better 
rh:^n concupiscence. The marriage of divorced persons is forbidden, except 
after mixed unions. Women are to be obedient to their husbands, slaves 
to their masters. “Everyone ought to remain in the station in which he was 
called” (i.e., converted to Christianity) . “If you were a slave when you were 
called, never mind. Even if you can gam your freedom, make the most of 
your present condition instead. For a slave who has been called to union with 
the Lord is a freedman of the Lord, just as a freeman who had been called is 
a slave of Christ.” ®® Freedom and slavery meant httle if the world was 
soon coming to an end. By the same token national hberty was unimportant. 
Let “every soul be in subjection to the higher powers, for there is no power 
but God, and the powers that be are ordained by God.” ®® It was ungracious 
of Rome to destroy so accommodating a philosopher. 


4. The Martyr 


‘T)o your best to come to me soon,” runs the doubtful second letter to 
Timothy, 


for Demas has deserted me for love of the present world . . . 
Crescens has gone, and Titus; no one but Luke is with me. ... At 
my first appearance in court no one came to help me; everybody de- 
serted me. . . . But the Lord stood by me, and gave me strength, so 
that I might make a full presentation of the message and let aU the 
heathen hear it. So I was saved from the jaws of the lion. . . . My 
life is already being poured out, and the time has come for my de- 
parture. I have had a part in the great contest. I have run my race, I 
have preserved the faith.®®® 

He spoke bravely, but he was desolate. One ancient tradition said that he 
was freed, went to Asia and Spain, preached again, and once more found 
himself a prisoner in Rome; probably he was never freed. Without wife or 
children to comfort him, with all friends gone but one, only his faith could 



THE APOSTLES 


591 


CHAP. XXVIl) 

support him; and perhaps that too was shaken. Like the other Christians of 
his age, he had lived on the hope of seeing Christ return. He had written 
to the Philippians: “We are eagerly awaiting the coming of a savior, the 
Lord Jesus Christ. . . . The Lord is coming soon.” i^d to the Corin- 
thians: “The appointed time has grown very short. From now on, those 
who have wives should live as though they had none . . . and those who 
buy anything as if they did not own it. ... For the present shape of the 
world is passing away , . . Maranatha! Lord, come quickly!”®® But in 
his second epistle to the Thessalonians he reproved them for neglecting the 
affairs of this world in expectation of Christ’s early advent; the coming will 
be delayed until the “Adversary”— Satan— “makes his appearance and pro- 
claims himself to be God.” We surmise from his last letters that he had 
struggled, during his imprisonment, to reconcile his early faith with the long 
delay in the Parousia or Second Appearance. More and more he put his hope 
beyond the grave, and made for his own solace the great adjustment that 
saved Christianity— the transformation of the behef in Christ’s earthly return 
into the hope of union with him in heaven after death. Apparently he was 
tried again, and convicted; Caesar and Christ came face to face, and Caesar 
won for a day. We do not know the precise charge; probably now, as at 
Thessalonica, Paul was accused of “disobeying the emperor’s decrees, and 
claiming that someone else called Jesus is king.” This was a crime of 
Tmiestas, punishable with death. We have no ancient record of the trial; but 
TertuUian, writing about 200, reports that Paul was beheaded at Rome; and 
Origen, about 220, writes that “Paul suffered martyrdom in Rome under 
Nero.” Probably, as a Roman citizen, he had the honor of a distinct 
execution, and was not mingled with the Christians crucified after the fire 
of 64. Tradition united him with Peter in a simultaneous, though separate, 
martyrdom; and a touching legend pictured the great rivals meeting in 
friendship on the road to death. Over the place on the Via Ostia, where 
the Church believed that Paul had found peace, a shrine was raised in the 
third century. Remade in ever fairer form, it stands today as the basilica 
of San Paolo fuori le Mura— St. Paul beyond the Walls. 

It is a fit symbol of his victory. The emperor who condemned him died 
a coward’s death, and soon nothing survived of his inordinate works. But 
from the defeated Paul came the theological structure of Christianity, as 
from Paul and Peter the astonishing organization of the Church. Paul had 
found a dream of Jewish eschatology, confined in Judaic Law; he had freed 
and broadened it into a faith that could move the world. With the patience 
of a statesman he had interwoven the ethics of the JeAVS with the meta- 
physics of the Greeks, and had transformed the Jesus of the Gospels into 
the Christ of theology. He had created a new mystery, a new form of the 



CAESAR AND CHRIST 


592 


(chap, XXVII 


resurrection drama, which would absorb and survive all the rest. He had 
replaced conduct with creed as the test of virtue, and in that sense had 
begun the Middle Ages. It was a tragic change, but perhaps humanity- 
had willed it SO; only a few saints could achieve the imitation of Christ, but 
man y souls could rise to faith and courage in the hope of eternal life. 

The influence of Paul was not immediately felt. The communities that 
' he had estabhshed were tiny isles in a pagan sea. The church at Rome was 
Peter’s, and remained faithful to his memory. For a century after Paul’s 
death he was almost forgotten. But when the first generations of Christianity 
had passed away, and the oral tradition of the apostles began to fade, and a 
hundred heresies disordered the Christian mind, the epistles of Paul provided 
the framework for a stabilizing system of behef that united the scattered 
congregations into a powerful Church. 

Even so, the man who had detached Christianity from Judaism was still 
so essentially Jewish in intensity of character and sternness of morahty that 
the Middle Ages, adopting paganism into a colorful Catholicism, saw no 
kindred spirit in him, built few churches to him, seldom sculptured his 
figure or used his name. Fifteen centuries went by before Luther made Paul 
the Apostle of the Reformation, and Calvin found in him the somber texts of 
the predestinarian creed. Protestantism was the triumph of Paul over Peter; 
Fundamentalism is the triumph of Paul over Christ. 


III. JOHN 

The accidents of history have transmitted Paul to us in comparative 
clarity, and have left the apostle John in obscurity and mystery. Besides 
three epistles, two major works have come down to us under his name. 
Criticism tentatively assigns the Book of Revelation to the year 69-70,’^^ 
and to another John, “the Presbyter” mentioned by Papias (135).'^^ Justin 
Martyr (135) attributes this powerful Apocalypse to the “beloved” apostle;'^^ 
but as early as the fourth century Eusebius'^® noted that some scholars 
doubted its authenticity. The author must have been a man of considerable 
prominence, for he addresses the churches of Asia in a tone of menacing 
authority. If the apostle wrote it (and we may provisionally continue to 
think so), we can understand why, like his brother James, he was called 
Boanerges, Son of Thunder. In Ephesus, Smyrna, Pergamum, Sardis, and 
other cities of Asia Minor, John, rather than Peter or Paul, was looked upon 
as the highest head of the Church. Tradition as reported by Eusebius held 
that John had been banished to Patmos by Domitian, and had on that Aegean 



THE APOSTLES 


CHAP. XXVIl) 


593 


isle written both the Fourth Gospel and the Apocalypse. He lived to so great 
an age that people said he would never die. 

In form Revelation resembles the books of Daniel and Enoch. Such 
prophetic-symboHc visions were a literary device frequently used by the 
Jews of the age; there were several other apocalypses (“hidden things 
revealed”), but this one surpassed all the rest in lurid eloquence. Starting 
from the common behef that the coming of the Kingdom of God would 
be preceded by the reign of Satan and the heyday of evil, the author 
describes the principate of Nero as precisely this Satanic age. Satan and 
his followers, having revolted against God, are defeated by Michael’s 
angelic hosts, are cast down upon the earth, and there lead the pagan world 
in the attack upon Christianity. Nero is the Beast and Antichrist of the book, 
a Messiah from Satan as Jesus was from God. Rome is described as “the 
harlot who sits on the great waters, with whom the kings of the earth have 
committed fornication”; she is the “whore of Babylon,” the source and 
center and summit of all iniquity, immorahty, perversion, idolatry; there 
the blasphemous and bloodstained Caesars demand the worship that Chris- 
tians must reserve for Christ. 

In a succession of visions the author sees the punishments that will fall 
upon Rome and its empire. A plague of locusts will for five months torture 
all inhabitants except the 144,000 Jews who have on their foreheads the sign 
of Christianity.'^’^ Other angels will empty “the seven vials of God’s wrath” 
upon the earth, afflicting men with terrible sores, and turning the sea “into 
blood like a dead man’s,” so that “every living thing in the sea” wiU die. 
Another angel will let loose the full heat of the sun upon all unrepentant 
men; another will cover the earth with darkness; four angels will lead “twice 
10,000 times 10,000” knights to slaughter a third of mankind. Four horsemen 
will ride forth to “kill the people with sword, famine, death, and the wild 
animals of the earth.” A great earthquake will tumble the planet into ruins; 
huge hailstones will fall upon the surviving infidels, and Rome "will be 
utterly destroyed. The kings of the earth will come together on the plains 
of Armageddon to make their last stand against God; but they will be 
overwhelmed in death. Satan and his cohorts, everywhere defeated, will be 
plunged into Hell. Only true Christians will be saved from these calamities; 
and those who have suffered for Christ’s sake, who have been “washed in 
the blood of the Lamb,” will receive abounding reward. 

After a thousand years Satan will be released to prey again upon mankind; 
sin will mount again in an unbelieving world; and the forces of evil will 
make a last effort to undo the work of God. But they will once more be 
overcome, and this time Satan and his followers will be cast into Hell for- 
ever. Then will come the Last Judgment, when all the dead wiU be raised 



CAESAR AND CHRIST 


594 


(chap, xxvii 


from their graves, and the drowned will be drawn up out of the seas. On 
that dread day all “whose names are not found in the Book of Life” will 
be “flung into ... a burning lake of fire and brimstone.” The faithful 
will “gather for God’s great banquet, and will eat the bodies of kings, com- 
manders, mighty men ... the bodies of all men, slaves or freemen, high 
or low,” who have not heeded the call of Christ. A new heaven and earth 
will be formed, and a New Jerusalem will come down from the hand of 
God to be a paradise on earth. It will have a foundation of precious stones, 
buildings of translucent silver or gold, walls of jasper, and each gate a single 
pearl; through it will run a “river of living water,” on whose bank will grow 
the “tree of life.” The reign of evil will be ended for all time; the faithful 
of Christ will inherit the earth; “there will be no death any longer, nor night, 
nor any grief or pain.” 

The influence of the Book of Revelation was immediate, enduring, and 
profound. Its prophecies of salvation for loyal behevers, and of punishment 
for their enemies, became the sustenance of a persecuted Church. Its theory 
of the millennium solaced those who mourned the long delay in the second 
coming of Christ. Its vivid images and brilliant phrases entered into both 
the popular and the literary speech of Christendom. For nineteen centuries 
men have interpreted the events of history as fulfillments of its visions; and 
in some recesses of the white man’s world it stiU gives its dark colors and 
bitter flavor to the creed of Christ. 


It seems incredible that the Apocalypse and the F ourth Gospel should have 
come from the same hand. The Apocalypse is Jewish poetry, the Fourth 
Gospel is Greek philosophy. Perhaps the apostle wrote Revelation in justifi- 
able wrath after Nero’s persecution, and the Gospel in the mellow meta- 
physics of his old age (a.d. 90? ) . His memories of the Master may by this 
time have faded a bit, so far as one could ever forget Jesus; and doubtless 
in the isles and cities of Ionia he had heard many an echo of Greek mysticism 
and philosophy. Plato had set a theme by picturing the Ideas of God as the 
patterns on which all things were formed; the Stoics had combined these 
Ideas into the Logos Spenmtikos or fertilizing wisdom of God; the Neo- 
Pythagoreans had made the Ideas a divine person; and Philo had turned 
them into the Logos or Reason of God, a second divine principle, through 
which God created, and communicated with, the world. If we reread the 
famous exordium of the Fourth Gospel with all this in mind, and retain the 
Logos of the Greek original in place of the translation Word, we perceive 
at once that John has joined the philosophers: 

In the beginning was the Logos; the Logos was with God, and the 
Logos was God. ... All things were made by the Logos; without 



THE APOSTLES 


595 


CHAP. XXVIl) 

him nothing was made that was made. It was by him that all things 
came into existence. ... So the Logos became flesh and blood, and 
dwelt amongst us. 

Just as Philo, learned in Greek speculation, had felt a need to rephrase 
Judaism in forms acceptable to the logic-loving Greeks, so John, having 
lived for two generations in a Hellenistic environment, sought to give a 
Greek philosophical tinge to the mystic Jewish doctrine that the Wisdom 
of God was a living being,*® and to the Christian doctrine that Jesus was 
the Messiah. Consciously or not, he continued Paul’s work of detaching 
Christianity from Judaism. Christ was no longer presented as a Jew, hving 
more or less under the Jewish Law; he was made to address the Jews as 
“you,” and to speak of their Law as “yours”; he was not a Messiah sent “to 
save the lost sheep of Israel,” he was the coeternal Son of God; not merely 
the future judge of mankind, but the primeval creator of the universe. In 
this perspective the Jewish life of the man Jesus could be put into the back- 
ground, faded almost as in Gnostic heresy; and the god Christ was assimilated 
to the religious and philosophical traditions of the Hellenistic mind. Now 
the pagan world— even the anti-Semitic world— could accept him as its own. 

Christianity did not destroy paganism; it adopted it. The Greek mind, 
dying, came to a transmigrated life in the theology and liturgy of the Church; 
the Greek language, having reigned for centuries over philosophy, became 
the vehicle of Christian literature and ritual; the Greek mysteries passed 
down into the impressive mystery of the Mass. Other pagan cultures con- 
tributed to the syncretist result. From Egypt came the ideas of a divine 
trinity, the Last Judgment, and a personal immortality of reward and pun- 
ishment; from Egypt the adoration of the Mother and Child, and the mystic 
theosophy that made Neoplatonism and Gnosticism, and obscured the Chris- 
tian creed; there, too, Christian monasticism would find its exemplars and 
its source. From Phrygia came the worship of the Great Mother; from 
Syria the resurrection drama of Adonis; from Thrace, perhaps, the cult of 
Dionysus, the dying and saving god. From Persia came miUennarianism, the 
“ages of the world,” the “final conflagration,” the dualism of Satan and God, 
of Darkness and Light; already in the Fourth Gospel Christ is the “Light 
shining in the darkness, and the darkness has never put it out.” The Mithraic 
ritual so closely resembled the eucharistic sacrifice of the Mass that Christian 
fathers charged the Devil with inventing these similarities to mislead frail 
minds.®" Christianity was the last great creation of the ancient pagan world. 



CHAPTER XXVIII 


The Growth of the Church 

A.D. 96-305 


I. THE CHRISTIANS 

T hey met in private rooms or small chapels, and organized themselves 
on the model of the synagogue^ Each congregation was called an 
ekklesia—^^t Greek term for the popular assembly in municipal govern- 
ments. Slaves were welcomed, as in the Isiac and Mithraic cults; no attempt 
was made to liberate them, but they were comforted by the promise of a 
Kingdom in which all could be free. The early converts were predominantly 
proletarian, with a sprinkling of the lower middle classes and an occasional 
conquest among the rich. Nevertheless, they were far from being the “dregs 
of the people,” as Celsus would claim; they lived for the most part orderly 
and industrious lives, financed missions, and raised funds for impoverished 
Christian communities. Little effort was made as yet to win over the rural 
population; these came in last, and it was in this strange way that their 
name pagani (villagers, peasants) came to be applied to the pre-Christian 
inhabitants of the Mediterranean states. 

Women were admitted to the congregations, and rose to some prominence 
in minor roles; but the Church required them to shame the heathen by lives 
of modest submission and retirement. They were bidden to come to worship 
veiled, for their hair was considered especially seductive, and even angels 
might be distracted by it during the service;^ Saint Jerome thought it should 
be entirely cut off.® Christian women were also to avoid cosmetics and 
jewelry, and particularly false hair; for the blessing of the priest, falling upon 
dead hair from another head, would hardly know which head to bless.^ Paul 
had instructed his communities sternly: 

Women should keep quiet in church. They must take a subordi- 
nate place. If they want to find out anything they should ask their 
husbands at home, for it is disgraceful for a woman to speak in 
church. ... A man ought not to wear anything on his head in 
church, for he is the image of God and reflects God’s glory, while 
woman is a reflection of man’s gIor)^ For man was not made from 

596 



597 


CHAP, xxvm) THE GROWTH OF THE CHURCH 

woman, but woman from man; and man was not created for woman, 
but woman for man. That is why she ought to wear upon her head 
something to symbolize her subjection.® 

This was the Judaic and Greek view of woman, not the Roman; perhaps 
it represented a reaction against the license into which some women had 
debased their growing liberty. We may believe, from these very fulmina- 
tions, that despite the lack of jewels and scents, and with the help of veils, 
Christian women succeeded in being attractive, and exercised their ancient 
powers in their subtle ways. For unmarried or widowed women the Church 
found many useful tasks. They were organized as “sisters,” performed works 
of administration or charity, and created in time the divers orders of those 
nuns whose cheerful kindliness is the noblest embodiment of Christianity. 

Lucian, about 160, described “those imbecUes,” the Christians, as “dis- 
daining things terrestrial, and holding these as belonging to all in common.” ® 
A generation later Tertullian declared that “we” (Christians) “have all 
things in common except our wives,” and added, with his characteristic 
bite: “at that point we dissolve our partnership, precisely where the rest 
of men make it effective.” ^ We should not take these statements literally; 
as another passage in Tertullian ® suggests, this communism meant merely 
that each Christian would contribute according to his means to the congre- 
gation’s common fund. The expectation of an early end to the existing order 
of things doubtless facilitated giving; the richer members may have been 
persuaded that they must not let the Last Judgment surprise them in the 
arms of Mammon. Some early Christians agreed with the Essenes that the 
prosperous man who does not share his surplus is a thief.® James, “brother 
of the Lord,” attacked wealth with words of revolutionary bitterness: 

Come, now, you rich people, weep aloud and howl over the mis- 
eries that shall overtake you! Your wealth has rotted, your clothes are 
moth-eaten, your gold and silver are rusted . . . and their rust will 
eat into yom: very flesh, for you have stored up fire for the last days. 

The wages you have withheld from the laborers who have reaped 
your harvests cry aloud, and their cries have reached the ears of the 
Lord of Hosts. . . . Has not God chosen the world’s poor to possess 
the Kingdom? 

In that Kingdom, he adds, the rich will wither like flowers under a scorching 
sun.^^ 

An element of communism entered into the custom of the common meal. 
As the Greek and Roman associations had met on occasion to dine together, 
so the early Christians gathered frequently in the agape or love feast, usually 



CAESAR AND CHRIST 


598 


(chap, xxviii 


on a Sabbath evening. The dinner began and ended with prayer and scrip- 
tural readings, and the bread and wine were blessed by the priest. The faith- 
ful appear to have believed that the bread and wine were, or represented, the 
body and blood of Christ; the worshipers of Dionysus, Attis, and Mithras 
had entertained like beliefs at the banquets where they ate the magic embodi- 
ments or symbols of their gods.^* The final ritual of the agape was the “kiss 
of love.” In some congregations this was given only by men to men, and 
by women to women; in others this hard restriction was not enforced. Many 
participants discovered an untheological delight in the pleasant ceremony; 
and Tertullian and others denounced it as having led to sexual indulgences.^^ 
The Church recommended that the lips should not be opened in kissing, 
and that the kiss should not be repeated if it gave pleasure.^® In the third 
century the agape gradually disappeared. 

Despite such episodes, and the diatribes of preachers calling their con- 
gregations to perfection, we may accept the old belief that the morals of 
the early Christians were a reproving example to the pagan world. After 
the weakening of the ancient faiths had removed their frail support from 
the moral life, and the attempt of Stoicism at an almost natural ethic had 
failed with all but the best of men, a new supernatural ethic accomplished, 
at whatever cost to the free and dissolvent intellect, the task of regulating 
the jungle instincts of man into a viable morality. The hope of the coming 
Kingdom carried with it belief in a Judge who saw every act, knew man’s 
every thought, and could not be eluded or deceived. To this divine sur- 
veillance was added mutual scrutiny: in these little groups sin could with 
difficulty find a hiding place; and the community publicly reprimanded those 
members who had violated the new moral code with insufficient secrecy. 
Abortion and infanticide, which were decimating pagan society, were 
forbidden to Christians as the equivalents of murder; in many instances 
Christians rescued exposed infants, baptized them, and brought them up with 
the aid of the community fund.^^ The Church forbade with less success 
the attendance of Christians at the theater or the public games, and their 
participation in the festivities of pagan holidays.^® In general, Christianity 
continued and exaggerated the moral sternness of the embattled Jews. Celi- 
bacy and virginity were recommended as ideal; marriage was tolerated only 
as a check on promiscuity and as a ridiculous means of continuing the race, 
but husband and wife were encouraged to refrain from sexual relations.^® 
Divorce was allowed only when a pagan wished to annul a marriage with 
a convert. The remarriage of widows or widowers was discountenanced, 
and homosexual practices were condemned with an earnestness rare in 
antiquity. “So far as sex is concerned,” said Tertullian, “the Christian is 
content with the woman.” 



CHAP. XXVIIl) THE GROWTH OF THE CHURCH 599 

Much of this difficult code was predicated on the early return of Christ. 
As that hope faded, the voice of the flesh rose again, and Christian morals 
were relaxed; an anonymous pamphlet. The Shepherd of Herman (ca. no), 
inveighed against the reappearance, among Christians, of avarice, dishonesty, 
rouge, dyed hair, painted eyelids, drunkenness, and adultery Nevertheless, 
the general picture of Christian morals in this period is one of piety, mutual 
loyalty, marital fidelity, and a quiet happiness in the possession of a confident 
faith. The younger Pliny was compelled to report to Trajan that the Chris- 
tians led peaceful and exemplary hves.^^ Galen described them as “so far 
advanced in self-discipline and . . . intense desire to attain moral excellence 
that they are in no way inferior to true philosophers.” The sense of sin 
took on a new intensity with the belief that all mankind had been tainted by 
Adam’s fall, and that soon the world would end in a judgment of eternal 
punishment or reward. Many Christians were absorbed in the effort to come 
clean to that dread assize; they saw a lure of Satan in every pleasure of the 
senses, denounced the “world and the flesh,” and sought to subdue desire 
with fasts and varied chastisements. They looked with suspicion upon music, 
white bread, foreign wines, warm baths, or shaving the beard— which seemed 
to flout the evident will of God.^^ Even for the ordinary Christian, fife took 
on a more somber tint than paganism had ever given it except in the occa- 
sional “apotropaic” appeasement of subterranean deities. The serious temper 
of the Jewish Sabbath was transferred to the Christian Sunday that replaced 
it in the second century. 

On that dies Domtni, or Lord’s Day, the Christians assembled for their 
weekly ritual. Their clergy read from the Scriptures, led them in prayer, 
and preached sermons of doctrinal instruction, moral exhortation, and sec- 
tarian controversy. In the early days members of the congregation, especially 
women, were allowed to “prophesy”— i.e., to “speak forth,” in trance or 
ecstasy, words to which meaning could be given only by pious interpreta- 
tion. When these performances conduced to ritual fever and theological 
chaos, the Church discouraged and finally suppressed them. At every step 
the clergy found itself obliged not to generate superstition, but to control it. 

By the close of the second century these weekly ceremonies had taken 
the form of the Christian Mass. Based partly on the Judaic Temple service, 
partly on Greek mystery rituals of purification, vicarious sacrifice, and 
participation, through communion, in the death-overcoming powers of the 
deity, the Mass grew slowly into a rich congeries of prayers, psalms, read- 
ings, sermon, antiphonal recitations, and, above all, that symbolic atoning 
sacrifice of the “Lamb of God” which replaced, in Christianity, the bloody 
offerings of older faiths. The bread and wine which these cults had con- 
sidered as gifts placed upon the altar before the god were now conceived as 



'6oo 


CAESAR AND CHRIST 


(chap. XXVIH 


changed by the priestly act of consecration into the body and blood of 
Christ, and were presented to God as a repetition of the self-immolation of 
Jesus on the cross. Then, in an intense and moving ceremony, the worshipers 
partook of the very life and substance of their Saviour. It was a conception 
long sanctified by time; the pagan mind needed no schoohng to receive it; 
by embodying it in the “mystery of the Mass,” Christianity became the last 
and greatest of the mystery religions. It was a custom lowly in origin 
and beautiful in development; its adoption was part of the profound wisdom 
with which the Church adjusted itself to the symbols of the age and the 
needs of her people; no other ceremony could have so heartened the essen- 
tially solitary soul, or so strengthened it to face a hostile world.* 

The eucharist, or “blessing” of the bread and wine, was one of the seven 
Christian “sacraments”— sacred rituals believed to convey divine grace. Here, 
too, the Church used the poetry of symbols to console and dignify the life of 
man, to renew at each step in the human odyssey the fortifying touch of 
deity. In the first century we find only three ceremonies conceived of as 
sacraments— baptism, communion, and holy orders; but already, in the cus- 
toms of the congregations, the germs of the rest were present. It was appar- 
ently the practice of the early Christians to add to baptism an “imposition 
of hands,” whereby the apostle or priest introduced the Holy Spirit into 
the believer;^^ in the course of time this action was separated from baptism 
and became the sacrament of confirmation.^® As the baptism of adults was 
gradually replaced by the baptism of infants, men felt the need of some 
later spiritual cleansing; public acknowledgment of sin passed into private 
confession to the priest, who claimed to have received from the apostles or 
their episcopal successors the right to “bind and loose”— to impose penances 
and pardon sins.®® The sacrament of penance was an institution capable of 
abuse through the ease of forgiveness; but it gave the sinner strength to 
reform, and spared anxious souls the neuroses of remorse. In these centuries 
marriage was still a civil ceremony; but by adding and requiring her sanction 
the Church hfted it from the level of a passing contract to the sanctity of 
an inviolable vow. By the year 200 the laying on of hands took the added 
form of “holy orders,” by which the bishops assumed the exclusive right 
to ordain priests capable of administering the sacraments vahdly. Finally 
the Church derived from the Epistle of James (v, 14) the sacrament of 
extreme unction, or last blessing, by which the priest anointed the sense 
organs and extremities of a dying Christian, cleansed him again of sin, and 
prepared him to meet his God. It would be the shallowest folly to judge 


• In the mysteries of Mityas the worshipers were offered consecrated bread and water 26 
Th^conqumadores were shocked to find similar rites among the Indians of Mexico and 



6oi 


CHAP.XXVIIl) THE GROWTH OF THE CHURCH 

these ceremonies in terms of their literal claims; in terms of human encourage- 
ment and inspiration they were the wisest medicaments of the soul. 

Christian burial was the culminating honor of the Christian life. Since 
the new faith proclaimed the resurrection of the body as well as of the soul, 
every care was taken of the dead; a priest officiated at the interment, and 
each corpse received an individual tomb. About the year loo the Christians 
of Rome, following Syrian and Etruscan traditions, began to bury their dead 
in catacombs— probably not for concealment but for the economy of space 
and expense. Workmen dug long subterranean passages at various levels, 
and the dead were laid in superimposed crypts along the sides of these 
galleries. Pagans and Jews practiced the same method, perhaps as a con- 
venience for burial societies. Some of the passages seem purposely devious, 
and suggest their use as hiding places in persecutions. After the triumph of 
Christianity the custom of catacomb burial died out; the crypts became 
objects of veneration and pilgrimage; by the ninth century they had been 
blocked up and forgotten, and only accident discovered them in 1578. 

What remains of early Christian art is for the most part preserved in the 
frescoes and reliefs of the catacombs. Here, about 1 80, appear the symbols that 
were to be so prominent in Christianity: the dove, representing the soul freed 
from the prison of this life; the phoenix, rising out of the ashes of death; the 
palm branch, announfcing victory; the olive branch, offering peace; and the fish, 
chosen because the Greek word for it, i-ch-th-ii^s, formed the initials of the 
phrase lesous Christos theou uios roter— “Jesus Christ, Son of God, Saviour.” 
Here also is the famous theme of the Good Shepherd, frankly modeled on a 
Tanagra statue of Mercury carrying a goat. Occasionally these designs catch a 
certain Pompeian grace, as in the flowers, vines, and birds that decorated the 
ceiling of St. Domitilla’s tomb; usually they are the undistinguished work of 
minor craftsmen corrupting with Oriental obscurity the clearness of classic line. 
Christianity was in these centuries so absorbed in the other world that it had 
little interest in adorning this one. It continued the Judaic aversion to statuary, 
confused imagery with idolatry, and condemned sculpture and painting as too 
often glorying in the nude; consequently, as Christianity grew, plastic art de- 
clined. Mosaic was more popular; the walls and floors of basilicas and baptistries 
were inlaid with tesselated foliage and flowers, the Paschal Lamb, and pictures 
from the Testaments. Similar scenes were carved in rough relief on sarcophagi. 
Meanwhile architects were adapting the Greco-Roman basilica to the needs of 
Christian worship. The small temples that had housed the pagan gods could 
offer no models for churches designed to enclose whole congregations; the 
spacious nave and aisles of the basilica lent themselves to this purpose, and its 
apse seemed naturally destined to become the sanctuary. In these new shrines 
Christian music inherited diffidently the Greek notation, modes, and scales. Many 



6o2 CAESAR AND CHRIST (CHAP. XXVIII 

theologians frowned upon the singing of women in church, or, indeed, in any 
public place; for a woman’s voice might arouse some profane interest in the ever 
excitable male.®’^ Nevertheless, the congregations often expressed in hymns their 
hope, thanksgiving, and joy; and music began to be one of the fairest adorn- 
ments and subtlest servants of the Christian faith. 

All in all, no more attractive religion has ever been presented to man- 
kind. It offered itself without restriction to all individuals, classes, and na- 
tions; it was not limited to one people, like Judaism, nor to the freemen of 
one state, like the official cults of Greece and Rome. By malting all men heirs 
of Christ’s victory over death, Christianity announced the basic equality 
of men, and made transiently trivial all differences of earthly degree. To 
the miserable, maimed, bereaved, disheartened, and humiliated it brought 
the new virtue of compassion, and an ennobling dignity; it gave them the 
inspiring figure, story, and ethic of Christ; it brightened their lives with the 
hope of the coming Kingdom, and of endless happiness beyond the grave. 
To even the greatest sinners it promised forgiveness, and their full acceptance 
into the community of the saved. To minds harassed with the insoluble 
problems of origin and destiny, evil and suffering, it brought a system of 
divinely revealed doctrine in which the simplest soul could find mental rest. 
To men and women imprisoned in the prose of poverty and toil it brought 
the poetry of the sacraments and the Mass, a ritual that made every major 
event of life a vital scene in the moving drama of God and man. Into the 
moral vacuum of a dying paganism, into the coldness of Stoicism and the 
corruption of Epicureanism, into a world sick of brutality, cruelty, oppres- 
sion, and sexual chaos, into a pacified empire that seemed no longer to need 
the mascuHne virtues or the gods of war, it brought a new morahty of 
brotherhood, kindliness, decency, and peace. 

So molded to men’s wants, the new faith spread with fluid readiness. 
Nearly every convert, with the ardor of a revolutionary, made himself an 
office of propaganda. The roads, rivers, and coasts, the trade routes and 
facilities, of the Empire largely determined the lines of the Church’s growth; 
eastward from Jerusalem to Damascus, Edessa, Dura, Seleucia, and 
Ctesiphon; southward through Bostra and Petra into Arabia; westward 
through Syria into Egypt; northward through Antioch into Asia Min or 
and Armenia; across the Aegean from Ephesus and Troas to Corinth and 
Thessalonica; over the Egnatian Way to Dyrrhachium; across the Adriatic 
to Brundisium, or through Scylla and Charybdis to Puteoli and Rome; 
through Sicily and Egypt to north Africa; over the Mediterranean or the 
Alps to Spain and Gaul, and thence to Britain; slowly the cross followed 
the fasces, and the Roman eagles made straight the way for Christ. Asia 



CHAP. XXVIIl) THE GROWTH OF THE CHURCH 603 

Minor was in these centuries the stronghold of Christianity; by 300 the 
majority of the population in Ephesus and Smyrna were Christians.®^ The 
new faith fared well in north Africa: Carthage and Hippo became leading 
centers of Christian learning and dispute; here rose the great Fathers of the 
Latin Church— Tertulhan, Cyprian, Augustine; here the Latin text of the 
Mass, and the first Latin translation of the New Testament, took form. 
In Rome the Christian community numbered some 100,000 by the end of 
the third century; it was able to send financial aid to other congregations; 
long since it had claimed for its bishop the supreme authority in the Church. 
Altogether we may count a fourth of the population in the East as Christian 
by 300, and a twentieth in the West. “Men proclaim,” said Tertullian {ca. 
200) , “that the state is beset with us. Every age, condition, and rank is coming 
over to us. We are only of yesterday, but already we fill the world.”®® 


II. THE CONFLICT OF CREEDS 

It would have been surprising if, in the multitude of relatively independ- 
ent centers of Christianity, subject to different traditions and environments, 
there had failed to develop a diversity of customs and creeds. Greek Chris- 
tianity in particular was destined to a flood of heresies by the metaphysical 
and argumentative habits of the Greek mind. Christianity can be understood 
only in the perspective of these heresies, for even in defeating them it took 
something of their color and form. 

One faith united the scattered congregations: that Christ was the son of 
God, that he would return to establish his Kingdom on earth, and that all 
who believed in him would at the Last Judgment be rewarded with eternal 
bliss. But Christians differed as to the date of the second advent. When Nero 
died and Titus demolished the Temple, and again when Hadrian destroyed 
Jerusalem, many Christians hailed these calamities as signs of the second 
coming. When chaos threatened the Empire at the close of the second cen- 
tury, Tertullian and others thought that the end of the world was at hand; ®^ 
a Syrian bishop led his flock into the desert to meet Christ halfway, and a 
bishop in Pontus disorganized the life of his community by announcing that 
Christ would return within a year.®® As all signs failed, and Christ did not 
come, wiser Christians sought to soften the disappointment by reinterpreting 
the date of his return. He would come in a thousand years, said an epistle 
ascribed to Barnabas;®® he would come, said the most cautious, when the 
“generation” or race of the Jews was quite extinct, or when the Gospel had 
been preached to all gentiles; or, said the Gospel of John, he would send 



6 o 4 CAESAR AND CHRIST (CHAP. XXVHI 

in his stead the Holy Spirit or Paraclete. Finally the Kingdom was trans- 
ferred from earth to heaven, from the years of our life to a paradise beyond 
the grave. Even the belief in the millennium— in the return of Jesus after a 
thousand years— was discouraged by the Church, and was ultimately con- 
demned. The faith in the second advent had established Christianity; the hope 
of heaven preserved it.* 

Aside from these basic tenets, the followers of Christ, in the first three cen- 
turies, divided into a hundred creeds. We should misjudge the function of his- 
tory— which is to illuminate the present through the past— were we to detail the 
varieties of religious belief that sought and failed to capture the growing Church, 
and which the Church had to brand, one after another, as disintegrating heresies. 
Gnosticism— the quest of godlike knowledge (gnosis) through mystic means 
—was not a heresy so much as a rival; it antedated Christianity, and had pro- 
claimed theories of a Soter, or Savior, before Christ was bom.^'^ That same Simon 
Magus of Samaria, whom Peter rebuked for “simony,” was probably the author 
of a Great Exposition which gathered together a maze of Oriental notions about 
the complicated steps that could lead the human mind to a divine comprehension 
of all things. In Alexandria the Orphic, Neo-Pythagorean, and Neoplatonist 
traditions, fusing with the Logos philosophy of Philo, stirred Basilides (117), 
Valentinus (160), and others to form weird systems of divine emanations and 
personified “aeons” of the world. In Edessa Bardesanes (200) created literary 
Syriac by describing these aeons in prose and verse. In Gaul the Gnostic Marcus 
offered to reveal to women the secrets of their guardian angels; his revelations 
were flattering, and he accepted their persons as his reward.®® 

The greatest of the early heretics was not quite a Gnostic, but was influenced 
by their mythology. About 140 Marcion, a rich youth of Sinope, came to Rome 
vowing to complete Paul’s work of divorcing Christianity from Judaism. The 
Christ of the Gospels, said Marcion, had described as his father a God of tender- 
ness, forgiveness, and love; but the Yahveh of the Old Testament was a harsh 
god of unrelenting justice, tyranny, and war; this Yahveh could not be the father 
of the gentle Christ. What good god, asked Marcion, would have condemned all 
mankind to misery for eating an apple, or desiring knowledge, or loving woman? 
Yahveh exists, and is the creator of the world; but he made the flesh and bones 
of man from matter, and therefore left man s soul imprisoned in an evil frame. 
To release the soul of man a greater god sent his son to earth; Christ appeared, 

• Thousands of Christians, including many who actually practice Christianity, interpret 
the disturbances of our time as the predicted portents of Christ’s early return. Millions of 
Christians, non-Christians, and atheists still beheve in an imminent earthly paradise where war 
and wickedness will cease. Historically the belief in heaven and the belief in utopia are like 
compensatory buckets in a well: when one goes down the other comes up. When the classic 
religions decayed, communistic agitation rose in Athens (430 b.c.), and revolution began in 
Rome (133 B.c.) , when these motements failed, resurrection faiths succeeded, culminating in 
Christianity; when, in our eighteenth century, Christian belief weakened, communism reap- 
peared. In this pierspective the future of religion is secure. ^ 



CHAP. XXVIIl) the growth OF THE CHURCH 605 

already thirty years of age, in a phantasmal, unreal body, and by his death won 
for good men the privilege of a purely spiritual resurrection. The good, said 
Marcion, are those who, following Paul, renounce Yahveh and the Jewish Law, 
reject the Hebrew Scriptures, shun marriage and all sensual enjoyment, and 
overcome the flesh by a stem asceticism. To propagate these ideas Marcion issued 
a New Testament composed of Luke’s Gospel and the letters of Paul. The Church 
excommunicated him, and returned to him the substantial sum that he had pre- 
sented to it on coming to Rome. 

While the Gnostic and Marcionite sects were spreading rapidly in both East 
and West, a new heresiarch appeared in Mysia. About 156 Montanus denounced 
the increasing worldliness of Christians and the growing autocracy of bishops 
in the Church; he demanded a return to primitive Christian simplicity and 
austerity, and a restored right of prophecy, or inspired speech, to the members 
of the congregations. Two women, Priscilla and Maximilla, took him at his word 
and fell into religious trances; and their utterances became the living oracles of 
the sect. Montanus himself prophesied with such eloquent ecstasy that his 
Phrygian followers— with the same religious enthusiasm that had once begotten 
Dionysus— hailed him as the Paraclete promised by Christ. He announced that 
the Kingdom of Heaven was at hand, and that the New Jerusalem of the Apoca- 
lypse would soon descend from heaven upon a neighboring plain. To the pre- 
destined spot he led so large a host that some towns were depopulated. As in 
early Christian days, marriage and parentage were neglected, goods were com- 
munistically shared, and an absorbed asceticism anxiously prepared the soul for 
Christ.^ When, about 190, the Roman proconsul Antonius persecuted Chris- 
tianity in Asia Minor, hundreds of Montanists, eager for paradise, crowded 
before his tribunal and asked for martyrdom. He could not accommodate them 
all; some he executed; but most of them he dismissed with the words: “Miserable 
creatures! If you wish to die are there not ropes and precipices?” The Church 
banned Montanism as a heresy, and in the sixlh century Justinian ordered the 
extinction of the sect. Some Montanists gathered in their churches, set fire to 
them, and let themselves be burned alive.^^ 

Of minor heresies there was no end. The Encratites abstained from meat, wine, 
and sex; the Abstinents practiced self-mortification and condemned marriage 
as a sin; the Docetists taught that Christ’s body was merely a phantom, not hu- 
man flesh; the Theodotians considered him only a man; the Adoptionists and 
the followers of Paul of Samosata thought that he had been born a man, but had 
achieved divinity through moral perfection; the Modalists, SabeUians, and Mo- 
narchians recognized in the Father and the Son only one person, the Monoph- 
ysites only one nature, the Monothelites only one will. The Church overcame 
them by its superior organization, its doctrinal tenacity, and its better under- 
standing of the ways and needs of men. 

In the third century a new danger rose in the East. At the coronation of 
Shapur I (242) a young Persian mystic, Mani of Ctesiphon, proclaimed himself 
a Messiah sent upon earth by the True God to reform the religious and moral 



6o6 CAESAR AND CHRIST (CHAP. XXVIir 

life of mankind. Borrowing from Zoroastrianism, Mithraism, Judaism, anc} 
Gnosticism, Mani divided the world into rival realms of Darkness and Light; 
the earth belonged to the kingdom of Darkness, and Satan had created man. 
Nevertheless, the angels of the God of Light had surreptitiously introduced 
some elements of light into humanity— mind, intelligence, reason. Even woman, 
said Mani, has in her some sparks of light; but woman is Satan’s masterpiece, his 
chief agent in tempting man to sin. If a man will refrain from sex, idolatry, and 
sorcery, and lead an ascetic life of vegetarianism and fasting, the elements of 
light in him can evercome his Satanic impulses, and lead him, like a kindly light, 
to salvation. After thirty years of successful preaching Mani was crucified at 
the suggestion of the Magian clergy, and his skin, stuffed with straw, was hung 
from one of Susa’s gates. Martyrdoms enflamed the faith to wild enthusiasm; 
Manicheism spread into western Asia and north Africa, won Augustine for ten 
years, survived the persecutions of Diocletian and the conquests of Islam, and 
maintained a declining life for a thousand years till the coming of Genghis Khan. 

The old religions still claimed a majority of the Empire’s population. 
Judaism gathered its impoverished exiles into scattered synagogues, and 
poured its piety into its Talmuds. The Syrians continued to worship their 
Baals under Hellenistic names, and the Egyptian priests tended faithfully 
their zoological pantheon. Cybele, Isis, and Mithras retained their addicts 
till the close of the fourth century; under AureUan a modified Mithraism 
captured the Roman state. Votive offerings to the classical divinities still 
came to the temples, initiates and candidates journeyed to Eleusis, and 
throughout the Empire aspiring citizens performed the motions of the im- 
perial cult. But life had gone out of the classic creeds. They no longer 
aroused, except here and there, the warm devotion that makes a religion 
live. It was not that the Greeks and the Romans abandoned these faiths, once 
so lovely or austere; they abandoned rather the will to live, and by exces- 
sive family limitation, or physiological exhaustion, or devastating wars, so 
reduced their own number that the temples lost their cultivators step by 
step with the farms. 

About the year 178, while Aurelius fought the Marcomanni on the 
Danube, paganism made a lusty attempt to defend itself against Christianity. 
We know of it only through Origen’s book Against Celsus, and the quota- 
tions recklessly made there from Celsus’ True Word. This second Celsus in 
our story was a gentleman of the world rather than a speculative philosopher; 
he felt that the civilization which he enjoyed was bound up with the old 
Roman faith; and he resolved to defend that faith by attacHng the Chris- 
tianity that was now its most challenging enemy. He made so intimate a 
study of the new religion that the learned Origen was astounded by his 
erudition. Celsus assailed the credibility of the Scriptures, the character 



CHAP. XXVIIl) THE GROWTH OF THE CHURCH 607 

of Yahveh, the importance of Christ’s miracles, the incompatibility of Christ’s 
death with his omnipotent divinity. He ridiculed the Christian belief in a 
final conflagration, the Last Judgment, and the resurrection of the body. 

It is silly to suppose that when God, like a cook, brings the fire, 
the rest of mankind will be roasted, and only the Christians will re- 
main— not merely the living ones, but those who died long ago, rising 
from the earth with the identical flesh they had before. Really, it is 
the hope of worms! ... It is only the simpletons, the ignoble, the 
senseless— slaves and women and children— whom Christians can per- 
suade— wool-dressers, and cobblers and fullers, the most uneducated 
and common men, whoever is a sinner ... or a godforsaken fool.^® 

Celsus was alarmed by the spread of Christianity, by its scornful hostility 
to paganism, military service, and the state; how was the Empire to protect 
itself from the barbarians prowling on every frontier if its inhabitants suc- 
cumbed to so pacifistic a philosophy? A good citizen, he thought, should 
conform to the religion of his country and his time without pubhc criticism 
of its absurdities; these did not much matter; what counted was a unifying 
faith supporting moral character and civic loyalty. Then, forgetting the 
insults he had heaped upon them, he appealed to the Christians to come 
back to the old gods, to worship the guardian genius of the emperor, and 
to join in the defense of the imperiled state. No one paid much attention 
to him; pagan literature does not mention him; he would have been quite 
forgotten had not Origen undertaken to refute him. Constantine was wiser 
than Celsus, and knew that a dead faith could not salvage Rome. 


III. PLOTINUS 

Moreover, Celsus was out of step with his time; he asked men to behave 
like gentlemen skeptics when they were withdrawing from a society that 
enslaved so many of them into a mystic world that made every man a god. 
That consciousness of supersensible powers which is the foundation of 
religion was prevailing universally over the materialism and determinism 
of a prouder age. Philosophy was abandoning the interpretation of that 
sense experience which is the realm of science, and was devoting itself to 
a study of the unseen world. Neo-Pythagoreans and Neoplatonists developed 
Pythagoras’ theory of transmigration, and Plato’s contemplation of the 
Divine Ideas, into an asceticism that sought to sharpen spiritual perception 
by starving the physical senses, and to reclimb by self-purification the steps 
by which the soul had been degraded from heaven into man. 



6o8 CAESAR AND CHRIST (CHAP. XXVin 

Plotinus was the culmination of this mystic theosophy. Bom at Lycopolis 
in 203, he was a Coptic Egyptian with a Roman name and a Greek educa- 
tion. In his twenty-eighth year he discovered philosophy, passed unsatisfied 
from teacher to teacher, and found at last, in Alexandria, the man he sought. 
Ammonius Saccas, a Christian converted to paganism, was attempting to 
reconcile Christianity and Platonism, as his pupil Origen would do. After 
studying under Ammonius for ten years, Plotinus joined a Persia-bound 
army in the hope of learning the wisdom of the Magi and the Brahmans at 
first hand. He reached Mesopotamia, turned back to Antioch, went to Rome 
(244), and remained there till his death. His school of philosophy became 
so fashionable that the Emperor Gallienus made him a court favorite, and 
agreed to help him cstabhsh in Campania an ideal Platonopolis, to be gov- 
erned on the principles of the Republic. Gallienus later withdrew his con- 
sent, perhaps to spare Plotinus an ignominious failure. 

Plotinus restored the repute of philosophy by living like a saint amid the 
luxuries of Rome. He had no care for his body; indeed, says Porphyry, “he 
was ashamed that his soul had a body.” He refused to sit for his portrait, 
on the ground that his body was the least important part of him— a hint 
to art to seek the soul. He ate no meat and little bread, was simple in his 
habits, kindly in his ways. He avoided all sexual relations, but did not con- 
demn them. His modesty befitted a man who saw the part in the perspective 
of the whole. When Origen attended his class, Plotinus blushed and wished 
to end his lecture, saying, “The zest dies down when the speaker feels that 
his hearers have nothing to learn from him.” He was not an eloquent 
speaker, but his devotion to his subject, and his absorbed sincerity, were 
good substitutes for oratory. Reluctantly, and only late in life, he put his 
doctrines into writing. He never revised his first draft, and despite Por- 
phyry’s editing, the Enneads remain among the most disorderly and difficult 
works in the history of philosophy.* 

Plotinus was an idealist who graciously recognized the existence of mat- 
ter. But matter by itself, he argued, is only the formless possibUity of form. 
Every form that matter takes is given it by its inward energy or soul 
(psyche). Nature is the total of energy or soul, producing the totality of 
forms in the world. The lower reality does not produce the higher; the 
higher being, soul, produces the lower-embodied form. The growth of 
the individual man from his beginnings in the womb, through the slow 
formation of organ after organ to full maturity is the work of the psyche 

* Porphyry arranged the fifty-four treatises into groups of nine {ennea) on the ground that 
m Pythagoras’ theory nine is the perfect number, since it is the square of three, which is the 
trinity of complete harmony 


CHAP.XXVIIl) THE GROWTH OF THE CHURCH 609 

or vital principle within him; the body is gradually molded by the longings 
and directives of the soul. Everything has soul— an inward energy creating 
outward form. Matter is evil only insofar as it has not received mature form; 
it is an arrested development; and evil is the possibility of good. 

We know matter only through idea— through sensation, perception, 
thought; what we call matter is (as Hume would say) only a bundle of 
ideas; at most it is an elusive hypothetical something pressing against our 
nerve ends (Mill’s “permanent possibility of sensation”). Ideas are not 
material; the notion of extension in space is obviously inappHcable to them. 
The capacity to have and use ideas is reason {nous ) ; this is the peak of the 
human triad of body, soul, and mind. Reason is determined insofar as it 
depends upon sensation; it is free insofar as it is the highest form of the 
creative, molding soul. 

The body is both the organ and the prison of the soul. The soul knows 
that it is a higher kind of reality than the body; it feels its kinship with some 
vaster soul, some cosmic creative life and power; and in the perfection of 
thought it aspires to join again that supreme spiritual reality from which it 
appears to have fallen in some primeval catastrophe and disgrace. Plotinus 
here surrenders discursively to the Gnosticism that he professes to reject, 
and describes the descent of the soul through various levels from heaven to 
corporeal man; generally he prefers the Hindu notion that the soul trans- 
migrates from lower to higher, or from higher to lower, forms of life accord- 
ing to its virtues and vices in each incarnation. Sometimes he is playfully 
Pythagorean: those who have loved music too much will become song- 
birds in their next avatar, and overspeculative philosophers will be trans- 
formed into eagles.^® The more developed the soul is the more persistently 
it seeks its divine source, like a child strayed from its parent, or a wanderer 
longing for home. If it is capable of virtue, or true love, or devotion to the 
Muses, or patient philosophy, it will find the ladder down which it came, 
and will climb it to its God. Let the soul, then, purify itself, let it desire the 
unseen essence passionately, let it lose the world in meditation; suddenly, 
perhaps in some moment when all the noise of the senses is stilled, and matter 
ceases to pound on the gates of mind, the soul will feel itself absorbed in 
the ocean of being, the spiritual and final reahty. (“Sometimes,” wrote 
Thoreau, idly drifting on Walden Pond, “I ceased to live, and began to 
be.”) “When this takes place,” says Plotinus, 

The soul will see divinity as far as it is lawful. . . . And she will see 
herself illuminated, full of intellectual light; or, rather, she will per- 
ceive herself to be a pure light, unburdened, agile, and becoming 
god.^'^ 



6lO CAESAR AND CHRIST (cHAP. XXVIII 

But what is God? “He” too is a triad— of unity {hen), reason {nous), and 
soul {psyche). “Beyond Being there is the One”; through the seeming 
chaos of mundane multiplicity runs a unifying life. We know almost nothing 
of it except its existence; any positive adjective or prejudiced pronoun 
applied to it would be an unwarrantable limitation; we may only call it 
One and First, and Good as the object of our supreme desire. Emanating 
from this Unity is the World Reason, corresponding to Plato’s Ideas, 
the formative models and ruHng laws of things; they are, so to speak, the 
thoughts of God, the Reason in the One, the order and rationality of the 
world. Since these Ideas persist while matter is a kaleidoscope of passing 
shapes, they are the only true or enduring reality. But Unity and Reason, 
though they hold the universe together, do not create it; this function is 
performed by the third aspect of the godhead— the vitalizing principle that 
fills all things and gives them their power and predestined form. Every- 
thing, from atoms to planets, has an activating soul, which is itself a part 
of the World-Soul; every Atman is Brahman. The individual soul is eternal 
only as vitality or energy, not as a distinct character.^® Immortahty is not 
the survival of personahty ; it is the absorption of the soul in deathless things.®® 

Virtue is the movement of the soul toward God. Beauty is not mere har- 
mony and proportion, as Plato and Aristotle thought, but the living soul 
or unseen divinity in things; it is the predominance of soul over body, of 
form over matter, of reason over things; and art is the translation of this 
rational or spiritual beauty into another medium. The soul can be trained 
to rise from the pursuit of beauty in material or human forms to seeking 
it in the hidden soul in Nature and her laws, in science and the subtle order 
that it reveals, finally in the divine Unity that gathers all things, even striv- 
ing and conflicting things, into a sublime and marvelous harmony.®^ In the 
end beauty and virtue are one— the unity and co-operation of the part with 
the whole. 

Withdraw into yourself and look. And if you do not find yourself 
beautiful, yet act as does the creator of a statue ... he cuts away 
here, he smooths there, he makes this line lighter, the other purer, 
until a lovely face has grown upon his work. So do you also: cut 
away all that is excessive, straighten all that is crooked . . . and never 
cease chiseling your statue until . . . you see the perfect goodness 
established in the stainless shrine.®^ 

We feel in this philosophy the same spiritual atmosphere as in contem- 
porary Christianity-the withdrawal of tender minds from civic interest 
to religion, a flight from the state to God. It was no accident that Plotinus 
and Origen were fellow pupils and friends, and that Clement developed a 



CHAP. XXVIIl) THE GROWTH OF THE CHURCH 6ll 

Christian Platonism at Alexandria. Plotinus is the last of the great pagan 
philosophers; and like Epictetus and Aurelius, he is a Christian without 
Christ. Christianity accepted nearly every line of him, and many a page of 
Augustine echoes the ecstasy of the supreme mystic. Through Philo, John, 
Plotinus, and Augustine, Plato conquered Aristotle, and entered into the 
profoundest theology of the Church. The gap between philosophy and 
religion was closing, and reason for a thousand years consented to be the 
handmaiden of theology. 


IV. THE DEFENDERS OF THE FAITH 

The Church now won to its support some of the finest minds in the Em- 
pire. Ignatius, Bishop of Antioch, began the powerful dynasty of the post- 
apostolic “Fathers,” who gave a philosophy to Christianity, and overwhelmed 
its enemies with argument. Condemned to be thrown to the beasts for refus- 
ing to abjure his faith (io8), Justin composed on his way to Rome several 
letters whose hot devotion reveals the spirit in which Christians could go 
to their death; 

I give injunctions to all men that I am dying willingly for God’s 
sake, if you do not hinder it. I beseech you, be not an unseasonable 
kindness to me. Suffer me to be eaten by the beasts, through whom I 
can attain to God. . . . Rather entice the wild beasts that they may 
become my tomb, and leave no trace of my body, that when I fall 
asleep I be not burdensome to any. ... I long for the beasts that are 
prepared for me. . . . Let there come upon me fire and cross [cruci- 
fixion], struggles with wild beasts, cutting and tearing asunder, rack- 
ings of bones, mangling of limbs, crushing of my whole body, and 
cruel tortures of the devil, if so I may attain to Jesus Christ! 

Quadratus, Athenagoras, and many others wrote “Apologies” for Christianity, 
usually addressed to the emperor. Minucius Felix, in an almost Ciceronian dia- 
logue, allowed his Caecilius to defend paganism ably, but made his Octavius 
answer him so courteously that Caecilius was almost persuaded to be a Chris- 
tian. Justin of Samaria, coming to Rome in the reign of Antoninus, opened there 
a school of Christian philosophy, and, in two eloquent “Apologies,” sought to 
convince the Emperor, and “Verissimus the Philosopher,” that Christians were 
loyal citizens, paid their taxes promptly, and might, under friendly treatment, 
become a valuable support to the state. For some years he taught unmolested; 
but the sharpness of his tongue made him enemies, and in i66 a rival philosopher 
prodded the authorities to arrest him and six of his followers, and put them aU 
to death. Twenty years later Irenaeus, Bishop of Lyons, struck a powerful blow 



6i2 


CAESAR AND CHRIST 


(chap. XXVIII 

for the unity of the Church in his Adversiis Haereses, a blast at all heretics. 
The only way of preventing Christianity from disintegrating into a thousand 
sects, said Irenaeus, was for all Christians to accept humbly one doctrinal au- 
thority— the decrees of the episcopal councils of the Church. 

The doughtiest fighter for Christianity in this period was Quintus Sep- 
timius Tertullianus of Carthage. Bom there about i6o, the son of a Roman 
centurion, he studied rhetoric in the same school that trained Apuleius; then 
for years he practiced law at Rome. Midway in life he was converted to 
Christianity, married a Christian, renounced all pagan pleasures, and (says 
Jerome) was ordained a priest. All the arts and tricks that he had learned 
from rhetoric and law were now put at the service of Christian apologetics, 
enhanced by a convert’s ardor. Greek Christianity was theological, meta- 
physical, mystical; Tertullian made Latin Christianity ethical, juristic, prac- 
tical. He had the vigor and virulence of Cicero, the satirical scurrility of 
Juvenal, and sometimes he could rival Tacitus in concentrating acid in a 
phrase. Irenaeus had written in Greek; with Minucius and Tertullian Chris- 
tian literature in the West became Latin, and Latin hterature became 
Christian. 

In the year 197, while Roman magistrates in Carthage were trying Chris- 
tians on charges of disloyalty, Tertullian addressed to an imaginary court 
the most eloquent of his works— the Apologeticus. He assured the Romans 
that Christians “are always praying for all emperors, for . . . a safe dynasty, 
brave armies, a faithful Senate, and a quiet world.” He extolled the 
grandeur of monotheism, and found premonitions of it in pre-Christian 
writers. O testhnoniimt anhme naturaliter Christiame! he cried in a happy 
phrase— “Behold the witness of the soul, by its very nature Christian!” A 
year later, passing with strange celerity from persuasive defense to ferocious 
attack, he issued De Spectactilis, a scornful description of the Roman theaters 
as citadels of obscenity, and of the amphitheaters as the acme of man’s in- 
humanity to man. And he concluded with a bitter threat: 

Other spectacles will come— that last eternal Day of Judgment 
. . . when all this old world and its generations shall be consumed in 
one fire. How vast the spectacle will be on that dav! How I shall 
marvel, laugh, rejoice, and exult, seeing so many kings-supposedly 
received into heaven-groaning in the depths of darkness!— and the 
magistrates who persecuted the name of Jesus melting in fiercer flames 
than they ever kindled . . . against the Christians!— sages and phi- 
losophers blushing before their disciples as they blaze together! 
and tragic actors now more than ever vocal in their own tragedy, and 



CHAP, xxrai) THE GROWTH OF THE CHURCH 613 

players lither of limb by far in the fire, and charioteers burning red 

on the wheel of flame! 

Such unhealthy intensity of imagination does not make for orthodoxy. 
As Tertullian aged, the same energy that in his youth had courted pleasure 
now turned into a fierce denunciation of every consolation but those of 
faith and hope. He addressed woman in the coarsest terms as “the gate by 
which the demon enters,” and told her that “it is on your account that Jesus 
Christ died.” Once he loved philosophy, and had written works like De 
Anima, applying Stoic metaphysics to Christianity; now he renounced all 
reasoning independent of revelation, and rejoiced in the incredibility of his 
creed. “God’s son died; it is behevable precisely because it is absurd 
[ineptu?}^] . He was buried and rose again: it is certain because it is impos- 
sible.” Sinking into a morose puritanism, Tertullian in his fifty-eighth 
year rejected the orthodox Church as too sullied with worldly ways, and 
embraced Montanism as a more outright application of the teachings of 
Christ. He condemned all Christians who became soldiers, artists, or state 
officials; all parents who did not veil their daughters; all bishops who restored 
repentant sinners to communion; finally he called the pope pastor moec- 
Aora?;/— “shepherd of adulterers.” 

Despite him the Church prospered in Africa. Able and devoted bishops 
like Cyprian made the diocese of Carthage almost as rich and influential as 
Rome’s. In Egypt the growth of the Church was slower, and its early stages 
are lost to history; suddenly, late in the second century, we hear of a 
“Catechetical School” in Alexandria, which wedded Christianity to Greek 
philosophy, and produced two major fathers of the Church. Both Clement 
and Origen were well versed in pagan literature, and loved it after their 
own fashion; if their spirit had prevailed there would have been a less 
destructive break between classical culture and Christianity. 

When Origenes Adamantius was seventeen (202) his father was arrested 
as a Christian, and condemned to death. The boy wished to join him in 
prison and martyrdom; his mother, failing to deter him by other means, hid 
all his clothes. Origen sent his father letters of encouragement: “Take 
heed,” he bade him, “not to change your mind on our account.”®® The 
father was beheaded, and the youth was left to care for the mother and 
six young children. Inspired to greater piety by the many martyrdoms he 
saw, he adopted the ascetic life. He fasted much, slept little and on bare 
ground, wore no shoes, and subjected himself wcold and nakedness; finally, 
in rigorous interpretation of Matthew xix, 12, he emasculated himself.* In 

* “As it was Origen’s general practice to allegorize Scripture,” says Gibbon, “it seems un- 
fortunate that, in this instance only, he should have adopted the literal sense.” 



(5i 4 CAESAR AND CHRIST (CHAP. XXVin 

203 he succeeded Clement as head of the Catechetical School. Though he 
was only eighteen, his learning and eloquence drew many students, pagan 
as well as Christian, and his fame spread throughout the Christian world. 

Some ancients reckoned his “books” at 6000; many, of course, were brief 
brochures; even so Jerome asked, “Which of us can read all that he has 
written?” In love with the Bible, which through boyhood memorizing 
had become part of his mind, Origen spent twenty years, and employed a 
corps of stenographers and copyists, collating in parallel columns the Hebrew 
text of the Old Testament, a Greek transhteration of that text, and Greek 
translations of it by the Septuagint, Aquila, Symmachus, and Theodotion.* 
By comparing these diverse renderings, and using his knowledge of Hebrew, 
Origen offered to the Church a corrected Septuagint. Insatiate, he added 
commentaries, sometimes of great length, on every book in the Bible. In 
Peri archon, “First Principles,” he achieved the first orderly and philosophi- 
cal exposition of Christian doctrine. In a “Miscellany” {Stromateis) he 
undertook to demonstrate all Christian dogmas from the writings of the 
pagan philosophers. To lighten his task he availed himself of that allegorical 
method by which pagan philosophers had made Homer accord with reason, 
and Philo had reconciled Judaism with Greek philosophy. The literal mean- 
ing of Scripture, argued Origen, overlay two deeper layers of meaning- 
the moral and the spiritual—to which only the esoteric and educated few 
could penetrate. He questioned the truth of Genesis as fiterally understood: 
he explained away as symbols the unpleasant aspects of Yahveh’s dealings 
with Israel; and he dismissed as legends such stories as that of Satan taking 
Jesus up to a high mountain and offering him the kingdoms of the world.®® 
Sometimes, he suggested, scriptural narratives were invented in order to 
convey some spiritual truth.®^ “What man of sense,” he asked, 

will suppose that the first and the second and the third day, and the 
evening and the morning, existed without a sun or moon or stars? 

Who is so foolish as to believe that God, like a husbandman, planted 
a garden in Eden, and placed in it a tree of life ... so that one who 
tasted of the fruit obtained hfe.^ 

As Origen proceeds it becomes apparent that he is a Stoic, a Neo-Pytha- 
gorean, a Platonist, and a Gnostic, who is nonetheless resolved to be a Chris- 
tian. It would have been too much to ask of a man that he should abandon 
the faith for which he had edited a thousand volumes and flung away his 
manhood. Like Plotinus he had studied under Ammonius Saccas, and some- 
times it is hard to distinguish his philosophy from theirs. God, in Origen, is 

* Of this Hexapla (sixfold) only fragments remain. Lost, too, is the Tetrapla, containing 
the four Greek translations. 



CHAP. XXVIIl) THE GROWTH OF THE CHURCH 615 

not Yahveh, he is the First Principle of all things. Christ is not the human 
figure described in the New Testament, he is the Logos or Reason who 
organizes the world; as such he was created by God the Father, and is 
subordinate to him.®® In Origen, as in Plotinus, the soul passes through a 
succession of stages and embodiments before entering the body; and after 
death it will pass through a hke succession before arriving at God. Even 
the purest souls will suffer for a while in Purgatory; but in the end all souls 
will be saved. After the “final conflagration” there will be another world 
with its long history, and then another, and another. . . . Each will improve 
on the preceding, and the whole vast sequence will slowly work out the 
design of God.®'^ 

We cannot wonder that Demetrius, Bishop of Alexandria, looked with 
some doubt upon the brilliant philosopher who adorned his diocese and 
corresponded with emperors. He refused to ordain Origen to the priest- 
hood, on the ground that emasculation disquahfied him. But while Origen 
was traveling in the Near East two Palestinian bishops ordained him. De- 
metrius protested that this infringed his rights; he convened a synod of his 
clergy; it annulled Origen’s ordination, and banished him from Alexandria. 
Orisen removed to Caesarea, and continued his work as a teacher. There 
he wrote his famous defense of Christianity Contra Celsum (248). With 
magnanimous spirit he admitted the force of Celsus’ arguments; but he 
replied that for every difficulty and Improbability in Christian doctrine there 
were worse incredibilities in paganism. He concluded not that both were 
absurd, but that the Christian faith offered a nobler way of life than could 
possibly come from a dying and idolatrous creed. 

In 250 the Decian persecution reached Caesarea. Origen, now sixty-five, 
was arrested, stretched on the rack, loaded with chains and an iron collar, 
and kept in prison for many days. But death caught up with Decius first, 
and Origen was released. He lived only three years more; torture had fatally 
injured a body already weakened by unremitting asceticism. He died as 
poor as when he had begun to teach, and the most famous Christian of his 
time. As his heresies ceased to be the secret of a few scholars, the Church 
found it necessary to disown him; Pope Anastasius condemned his “blas- 
phemous opinions” in 400, and In 553 the Council of Constantinople pro- 
nounced him anathema. Nevertheless, nearly every later Christian savant for 
centuries learned from him, and depended upon his work; and his defense 
of Christianity impressed pagan thinkers as no “apology” had done before 
him. With him Christianity ceased to be only a comforting faith; it became 
a full-fledged philosophy, buttressed with Scripture but proudly resting on 
reason. 



6i6 


CAESAR AND CHRIST 


(chap, xxvin 


V. THE ORGANIZATION OF AUTHORITY 

The Church might be excused for condemning Origen: his principle of 
allegorical interpretation not only made it possible to prove anything, but 
at one blow it did away with the narratives of Scripture and the earthly life 
of Christ; and it restored individual judgment precisely while proposing 
to defend the faith. Faced with the hostility of a powerful government, the 
Church felt the need of unity; it could not safely allow itself to be divided 
into a hundred feeble parts by every wind of intellect, by disloyal heretics, 
ecstatic prophets, or brilliant sons. Celsus himself had sarcastically observed 
that Christians were “split up into ever so many factions, each individual 
desiring to have his own party.” About 1 87 Irenaeus listed twenty varieties 
of Christianity; about 384 Epiphanius counted eighty. At every point for- 
eign ideas were creeping into Christian belief, and Christian believers were 
deserting to novel sects. The Church felt that its experimental youth was 
ending, its maturity was near; it must now define its terms and proclaim 
the conditions of its membership. Three difficult steps were necessary: the 
formation of a scriptural canon, the determination of doctrine, and the 
organization of authority. 

The literature of Christianity in the second century abounded in gospels, 
epistles, apocalypses, and “acts.” Christians differed widely in accepting or 
rejecting these as authoritative expressions of the Christian creed. The Western 
churches accepted the Book of Revelation, the Eastern churches generally re- 
jected it; these accepted the Gospel according to the Hebrews and the Epistles 
of James, the Western churches discarded them. Clement of Alexandria quotes 
as sacred scripture a late first-century treatise. The Teaching of the Twelve 
Apostles. Marcion’s publication of a New Testament forced the hand of the 
Church. We do not know when the books of our present New Testament were 
determined as canonical— i.e., as authentic and inspired; we can only say that a 
Latin fragment discovered by Muratori in 1740, named after him, and generally 
assigned to ca. 1 80, assumes that the canon had by that time been fixed. 

Ecclesiastical councils or synods met with increasing frequency in the sec- 
ond century. In the third they were limited to bishops; and by the close of that 
century they were recognized as the final arbiters of “Catholic”— i.e., universal 
-Christian belief. Orthodox)^ survived heresy because it satisfied the need for 
a definite creed that could moderate dispute and quiet doubt, and because it 
was supported by the power of the Church. 

The problem of organization lay in determming the center of that power. 
After the weakening of the mother church at Jerusalem, the individual con- 
gregations, unless established or protected by other communities, appear to have 



CHAP.XXVIIl) THE GROWTH OF THE CHURCH 617 

exercised an independent authority. The church of Rome, however, claimed 
to have been founded by Peter, and quoted Jesus as saying: “Thou art Peter” 
(Heb. Cephas, Gk. Petros), “and upon this rock” (Heb. Cephas, Gk. petra) “I 
will build my church, and the gates of Hell shall not prevail against it. I will 
give you the keys of the Kingdom of Heaven; and whatsoever thou shalt bind 
on earth shall be bound in heaven; and whatsoever thou shalt loose on earth 
shall be loosed in heaven.” The passage has been challenged as an interpolation, 
and as a pun to which only Shakespeare would stoop; but the likelihood remains 
that Peter, if he did not establish the Christian colony in Rome, preached to it, 
and appointed its bishop.'^® Irenaeus (187) wrote that Peter “committed to the 
hands of Linus the office of the episcopate”; Tertullian (200) confirmed this 
tradition; and Cyprian (252), bishop of Rome’s great rival, Carthage, urged all 
Christians to accept the primacy of the Roman see.'^^ 

The earliest occupants of “Peter’s throne” left no mark upon history. The 
third. Pope * Clement, stands out as the author of an extant letter written about 
96 to the church of Corinth, appealing to its members to maintain harmony and 
order; here, only a generation after Peter’s death, the bishop of Rome speaks 
with authority to the Christians of a distant congregation. The other bishops, 
while acknowledging the “primacy”of the Roman bishop as the lineal successor 
of Peter, repeatedly challenged his power to overrule their own decisions. The 
Eastern churches celebrated Easter on the fourteenth day of the Jewish month 
of Nisan, whatever day of the week this might be; the Western churches post- 
poned the feast to the following Sunday. Polycarp, Bishop of Smyrna, visiting 
Rome about 1 56, tried and failed to persuade Anicetus, Bishop of Rome, to have 
the Eastern date observed in the West; and on his return he rejected the Pope’s 
suggestion that the Eastern churches should accept the Western date. Pope 
Victor ( 190) rephrased Anicetus’ request as a command; the bishops of Palestine 
obeyed, those of Asia Minor refused. Victor sent out letters to the Christian 
congregations, excommunicating the recalcitrant churches; many bishops, even 
in the West, protested against so severe a measure, and apparently Victor did 
not insist. 

His successor Zephyrinus (202-18) was “a simple and unlettered man.”'*^® 
To aid him in administering the spreading episcopate of Rome, Zephyrinus raised 
to the archdeaconate a man whose intelligence was less questioned than his 
morals. Callistus, said his enemies, had begun his career as a slave, had become 
a banker, had embezzled the funds deposited with him, had been sentenced to 
hard labor, had been released, had started a riot in a synagogue, had been con- 
demned to the mines of Sardinia, had escaped by having his name surreptitiously 
inserted into a list of pardoned prisoners, and had then lived for ten years at 
Antium in painful peace. When Zephyrinus placed him in charge of the papal 
cemetery he transferred it to the Via Appia, in the catacomb that bears his name. 
When Zephyrinus died, and Callistus was chosen pope, Hippolytus and some 

* The term papa, “father,” which became in English pope, was applied in the first three 
centuries to any Christian bishop. 




6l8 CAESAR AND CHRIST (CHAP. XXVin 

Other priests denounced him as unfit, and set up a rival church and papacy 
(218). Doctrinal differences accentuated the schism: Callistus believed in read- 
mitting to the Church those who, after baptism, had committed a mortal sin 
(adultery, murder, apostasy), and who professed their penitence. Hippolytus 
considered such lenience ruinous, and wrote a Refutation of All Heresies, with 
special attention to this one. Callistus excommunicated him, gave the Church a 
competent administration, and vigorously asserted the supreme authority of 
the Roman see over all Christendom. 

The schism of Hippolytus ended in 235; but under Pope Cornelius (251-53) 
his heresy was revived by two priests— Novatus at Carthage and Novatian at 
Rome— who set up schismatic churches dedicated to the unrelenting exclusion 
of postbaptismal sinners. The Council of Carthage under Cyprian, and the Coun- 
cil of Rome under Cornelius, excommunicated both groups. Cyprian’s appeal 
for Cornelius’ support strengthened the papacy; but when Pope Stephen I 
(254-57) ruled that converts from heretical sects need not be rebaptized, Cyprian 
led a synod of African bishops in rejecting the decree. Stephen, like another 
Cato, excommunicated them in an ecclesiastical Punic War; his providentially 
early death allowed the quarrel to lapse, and averted the secession of the powerful 
African Church. 

Despite overreachings and setbacks, the Roman see increased its power 
with almost every decade. Its wealth and ecumenical charities exalted its 
prestige; it was consulted by the Christian world on every issue of gravity; 
it took the initiative in repudiating and combating heresies, and in defining 
the canon of the Scriptures. It was deficient in scholars, and could not boast 
a TertuUian, an Origen, or a Cyprian; it gave its attention to organization 
rather than to theory; it built and governed and let others write and talk. 
Cyprian rebelled; but it was he who, in his De Ccttholicae Ecclesiae Unitate, 
acclaimed the see or seat of Peter {cathedra Petri) as the center and summit 
of Christendom, and proclaimed to the world those principles of solidarity, 
unanimity, and persistency which have been the essence and mainstay of 
the Cathohc Church.^^ By the middle of the third century the position and 
resources of the papacy were so strong that Decius vowed he would rather 
have a rival emperor at Rome than a pope.^® The capital of the Empire 
naturally became the capital of the Church. 

As Judea had given Christianity ethics, and Greece had given it theology, 
so now Rome gave it organization; all these, with a dozen absorbed and 
rival faiths, entered into the Christian synthesis. It was not merely that the 
Church took over some religious customs and forms common in pre-Chris- 
tian Rome-the stole and other vestments of pagan priests, the use of incense 
and holy water in purifications, the burning of candles and an everlast- 
before the altar, the worship of the saints, the architecture 



CHAP, xxvm) THE GROWTH OF THE CHURCH 619 

of the basilica, the law of Rome as a basis for canon law, the title of Pontifex 
Maximus for the Supreme Pontiff, and, in the fourth century, the Latin 
language as the noble and enduring vehicle of Catholic ritual. The Roman 
gift was above all a vast framework of government, which, as secular au- 
thority failed, became the structure of ecclesiastical rule. Soon the bishops, 
rather than the Roman prefects, would be the source of order and the seat 
of power in the cities; the metropolitans, or archbishops, would support, if 
not supplant, the provincial governors; and the synod of bishops would 
succeed the provincial assembly. The Roman Church followed in the foot- 
steps of the Roman state; it conquered the provinces, beautified the capital, 
and established discipline and unity from frontier to frontier. Rome died in 
giving birth to the Church; the Church matured by inheriting and accepting 
the responsibilities of Rome. 



CHAPTER XXIX 


The Collapse of the Empire 


A.D. 193-305 


I. A SEMITIC DYNASTY 

O N January i, 193, a few hours after the assassination of Commodus, 
the Senate met in a transport of happiness, and chose as emperor one 
of its most respected members, whose just administration as prefect of the 
city had continued the finest traditions of the Antonines. Pertinax accepted 
with reluctance a dignity so exalted that any fall from it must be fatal. He 
“demeaned himself as an ordinary man,” says Herodian,^ attended the lec- 
tures of the philosophers, encouraged literature, replenished the treasury, 
reduced taxes, and auctioned off the gold and silver, the embroideries and 
silks and beautiful slaves, wherewith Commodus had filled the imperial 
palace; “in fact, he did everything,” says Dio Cassius, “that a good emperoi 
should do. “ The freedmen who had lost their perquisites through his 
economy conspired with the Praetorian Guard, which disliked his restora- 
tion of discipline. On March 28, 300 soldiers forced their way into the 
palace, struck Ijim down, and carried his head upon a spear to their camp. 
The people and the Senate mourned and hid. 

The leaders of the Guard announced that they would bestow the crown 
upon that Roman who should offer them the largest donative. Didius Julianus 
was persuaded by his wife and daughter to interrupt his meal and enter his 
bid. Proceeding to the camp, he found a rival offering 5000 drachmas 
($3000) to each soldier in return for the throne. The agents of the Guard 
passed from one millionaire to the other, encouraging higher bids; when 
Julianus promised each man 6250 drachmas the Guard declared him emperor. 

Aroused by this crowning indignity, the people of Rome appealed to 
the legions in Britain, Syria, and Pannonia to come and depose Julianus. 
The legions, angered by exclusion from the donative, hailed their respective 
generals with the imperial title, and marched toward Rome. The Pannonian 
commander, Lucius Septimius Severus Geta, gained the Principate by bold- 
ness, expedition, and bribery. He pledged himself to give each soldier 12,000 
drachmas upon his accession; he led them from the Danube to within seventy 

620 



CHAP.XXIX) THE COLLAPSE OF THE EMPIRE 621 

miles of Rome in a month; he won over to himself the troops sent to halt 
him, and subdued the Praetorians by offering them pardon in return for the 
surrender of their leaders. He violated precedent by entering the capital 
with all his troops in full armor, but he himself appeased tradition by wear- 
ing civihan dress. A tribune found Julianus in tears and terror in the palace, 
led him into a bathroom, and beheaded him (June 2, 193). 

Africa, which was at this time providing Christianity with its ablest de- 
fenders, gave birth (146) and early schooling to Septimius. Brought up in 
a family of Punic-speaking Phoenicians, he studied literature and philosophy 
in Athens and practiced law in Rome. Despite the Semitic accent of his 
Latin, he was among the best-educated Romans of his time, and liked to 
surround himself with poets and philosophers. But he did not allow philos- 
ophy to impede his wars, or poetry to soften his character. He was a man 
of handsome features, strong physique, and simple dress, hardy in hardship, 
clever in strategy, fearless in battle, ruthless in victory. He conversed with 
wit, judged with penetration, lied without scruple, loved money more than 
honor, and governed with cruelty and competence.® 

The Senate had made the mistake of declaring for his rival Albinus; Sep- 
timius, surrounded with 600 guards, persuaded it to confirm his own acces- 
sion; then he put scores of senators to death, and confiscated so many aristo- 
cratic estates that he became landlord to half the peninsula. The decimated 
Senate was replenished by imperial nomination with new members chiefly 
from the monarchical East. The great lawyers of the age— Papinian, Paulus, 
Ulpian— accumulated arguments in defense of absolute power. Septimius 
ignored the Senate except when he sent it commands; he assumed full con- 
trol of the various treasuries, based his rule frankly upon the army, and 
made the Principate an hereditary military monarchy. The army was in- 
creased in size; the pay of the soldiers was raised, and became an exhausting 
drain upon the public purse. Military service was made compulsory, but was 
forbidden to the inhabitants of Italy; henceforth provincial legions would 
choose emperors for a Rome that had lost the fortitude to rule. 

This realistic warrior believed in astrology, and excelled in the interpreta- 
tion of portents and dreams. When, six years before his accession, his first 
wife died, he offered his hand to a rich Syrian whose horoscope had pledged 
her a throne. Julia Domna was the daughter of a rich priest of the god 
Elagabal at Emesa. There, long since, a meteorite had fallen, had been en- 
shrined in a gaudy temple, and was worshiped as the symbol, if not the 
embodiment, of the deity. Julia came, bore Septimius two sons, Caracalla 
and Geta, and rose to her promised throne. She was too beautiful to be 
monogamous, but Septimius was too busy to be Jealous. She gathered around 
her a salon of literary men, patronized the arts, and persuaded Philostratus 



622 CAESAR AND CHRIST (CHAP. XXIX 

to write and adorn the life of Apollonius of Tyana. Her strong character 
and influence accelerated that orientation of the monarchy toward Eastern 
ways which culminated morally under Elagabalus, and pohtically under 
Diocletian. 

Of his eighteen years as emperor Septimius gave twelve to war. He de- 
stroyed his rivals in swift and savage campaigns; he razed Byzantium after 
a four years’ siege, thereby lowering a barrier to the spreading Goths; he 
invaded Parthia, took Ctesiphon, annexed Mesopotamia, and hastened the 
fall of the Arsacid kings. In his old age, suffering from gout but fretful lest 
his army deteriorate through five years of peace, he led an expedition into 
Caledonia. After expensive victories against the Scots he withdrew into 
Britain, and retired to York to die (211). “I have been everything,” he 
said, “and it is worth nothing.” * Caracalla, says Herodian, “was much vexed 
that his father’s decease was so lingering . . . and sohcited the physicians 
to dispatch the old man by any means that might come to hand.” ® Septimius 
had blamed Aurelius for yielding the Empire to Commodus; now he be- 
queathed it to Caracalla and Geta, with cynical advice; “Make your soldiers 
rich, and do not bother about anything else.” ® He was the last emperor, for 
eighty years, who died in bed. 

Caracalla,* like Commodus, seemed made to prove that a man’s quota 
of energy seldom allows him to be great in both his life and his seed. Attrac- 
tive and obedient in boyhood, he became in manhood a barbarian infatuated 
with hunting and war. He captured wild boars, fought a lion singlehanded, 
kept lions always near him in his palace, and had one as occasional table 
companion and bedfellow.^ He particularly enjoyed the company of gladi- 
ators and soldiers, and would keep senators cooling their heels in his ante- 
chambers while he prepared food and drink for his companions. Unwilling 
to share the imperial power with his brother, he had Geta assassinated in 
212; the youth was slaughtered in his mother’s arms, and covered her gar- 
ments with his blood. We are told that Caracalla condemned to execution 
20,000 of Geta s following, many citizens, and four Vestal Virgins whom he 
accused of adultery.® When the army murmured at the killin g of Geta, he 
silenced it with a donative equal to all the sums that Septimius had gathered 
into all the treasuries. He favored the soldiers and the poor against the busi- 
ness classes and the aristocracy; possibly the stories we read about him in 
Dio Cassius are a senator’s revenge. Anxious to raise more revenue, he 
doubled the inheritance tax to ten per cent; and noting that the tax applied 
only to Roman citizens, he extended the Roman franchise to all free male 


He called himself so from the long Gallic tunic that he wore; his real name was Bassianius; 
as emperor he styled himself Marcus Aurelius Antoninus GQrc.t'ollo 



CHAP.XXIX) THE COLLAPSE OF THE EMPIRE 623 

adults in the Empire (212); they achieved citizenship precisely when it 
brought a maximum of obligations and a minimum of power. He added to 
the adornment of Rome an arch to Septimius Severus, which still stands, 
and public baths whose gigantic ruins attest their ancient grandeur. But for 
the most part he left the civil government to his mother, and absorbed him- 
self in campaigns. 

He had made Julia Domna secretary both a libellis and ab epistulis—oi 
petitions and correspondence. She joined or replaced him in greeting high 
members of the state or foreign dignitaries. Gossip whispered that she con- 
trolled him by incestuous means; the wits of Alexandria maddened him by 
referring to her and him as Jocasta and Oedipus. Partly in revenge against 
these insults, partly because he feared that Egypt might revolt while he was 
fighting Parthia, he visited the city and superintended (we are assured) the 
massacre of all Alexandrians capable of bearing arms.® 

Nevertheless, the founder of Alexandria was his model and envy. He 
organized 16,000 troops into what he called “Alexander’s phalanx,” equipped 
them with ancient Macedonian arms, and dreamed of subduing Parthia as 
Alexander had conquered Persia. He tried hard to be a good soldier, sharing 
the food and toil and marches of his army, helping it to dig ditches and 
build bridges, bearing himself bravely in action, and often challenging the 
enemy to single combat. But his men were not as eager for the Parthian 
campaign as he was; they loved spoils more ardently than battle; and at 
Carrhae, where Crassus had been defeated, they stabbed him to death (217). 
Macrinus, prefect of the Guard, acclaimed himself emperor, and ordered 
the reluctant Senate to make Caracalla a god. Julia Domna, banished to 
Antioch, and bereft, within six years, of empire, husband, and sons, refused 
food until she died.^“ 

She had a sister, Julia Maesa, as capable as herself. Returning to Emesa, 
this second Julia found there two promising grandsons. One, by her daughter 
Julia Soaemias, was a young priest of Baal; his name was Varius Avitus, and 
would be Elagabalus— “the creative god.” * The other, by Maesa’s daughter 
Julia Mamaea, was a boy of ten called Alexianus, and would be Alexander 
Severus. Though Varius was the son of Varius Marcellus, Maesa spread the 
rumor that he was the natural son of Caracalla, and gave him the name 
Bassianus; the Empire was worth her daughter’s reputation, and Marcellus 
was dead. The Roman soldiers in Syria were already half won to Syrian 
cults, and felt a pious respect for the fourteen-year-old priest; moreover, 
Maesa suggested that if they would make Elagabalus emperor she would 
distribute a substantial donative among them. The soldiers were convinced. 


* Wrongly transformed by Latin writers into Heliogabalus— “the sun-god.” 



CAESAR AND CHRIST 


624 


(chap. XXIX 


and complied. Maesa’s gold brought over to her cause the army that Macrinus 
sent against them. When Macrinus himself appeared with a substantial 
force, the Syrian mercenaries wavered; but Maesa and Soaemias sprang from 
their chariots, and led the softened army to victory. The men of Syria were 
women, and the women were men. 

In the spring of 2 19 Elagabalus entered Rome dressed in robes of purple 
silk embroidered with gold, his cheeks stained with vermilion, his eyes arti- 
ficially brightened, costly bracelets on his arms, a string of pearls around 
his neck, a jeweled crown on his pretty head. Beside him his grandmother 
and his mother rode in state. On his first appearance in the Senate he de- 
manded that his mother should be allowed to sit beside him and attend the 
deliberations. Soaemias had the sense to withdraw, and contented herself 
with presiding over that Senaciilmn, or little Senate, of women, which 
Hadrian’s Sabina had founded, and which dealt with questions of feminine 
dress, jewelry, precedence, and etiquette. Grandmother Maesa was left to 
govern the state. 

The young emperor had some elements of charm. He made no reprisals 
against the supporters of Macrinus. He loved music, sang well, played the 
pipes, the organ, and the horn. Being too young to rule the Empire, he only 
asked permission to enjoy it. Pleasure, not Baal, was his god, and he was 
resolved to worship it in all its genders and forms. He invited every class 
of the free population to visit his palace; at times he would eat and drink and 
make merry with them; often he would distribute among them lottery 
prizes ranging from a furnished home to a handful of flies. He loved to play 
jokes upon his guests; to seat them on inflated cushions that would suddenly 
burst; to stupefy them with wine and let them wake up amid harmless 
leopards, bears, and lions. Lampridius assures us that Elagabalus never spent 
less than 100,000 sesterces (| 10,000) —and sometimes 3,000,000— on a ban- 
quet to his friends. He would mix gold pieces with peas, onyx with lentils, 
pearls with rice, amber with beans; he would present horses, or chariots, 
or eunuchs, as favors; often he bade each guest take home the silver plate 
and goblets in which the dinner had been served. As for himself, he would 
have nothing but the best. The water in his swimming pools was perfumed 
with essence of roses; the fixtures in his bathrooms were of onyx or gold; his 
food had to be of costly rarities; his dress was studded with jewelry from 
crown to shoes; and gossip said that he never wore the same rings twice. 
MTien he traveled, 600 chariots were needed to carry his baggage and his 
bawds. Told by a soothsayer that he would die a violent death, he prepared 
worthy means of suicide if occasion required: cords of purple silk, swords 
of gold, poisons enclosed in sapphires or emeralds.^i He was slain in a latrine. 

Probably his enemies of the Senatorial class invented or exaggerated some 




Fig. -^6— Arch of Septimhis Sevems, Rome 











Fig. ^^—Sarcophagus of the Empress Helena 
Vatican, Rome 



CHAP.XXIX) THE COLLAPSE OF THE EMPIRE 625 

of these tales; certainly the stories of his sexual depravity are beyond belief. 
In any case he perfumed his lust with piety, and schemed to spread among 
the Romans some worship of his Syrian Baal. He had himself circumcized, 
and thought of emasculating himself in honor of his god. He brought from 
Emesa the conical black stone which he worshiped as the emblem of Elagabal; 
he raised an ornate temple to house it; the stone, encrusted with gems, was 
carried to it on a chariot drawn by six white horses, while the young emperor 
walked backward before it in dumb adoration. He was willing to recognize 
all other religions; he patronized Judaism, and proposed to legalize Chris- 
tianity. He merely insisted, with admirable loyalty, that his stone was the 
greatest of gods.^^ 

His mother, absorbed in amours, looked with indulgence upon this Priapic 
farce; but Julia Maesa, failing to control it, resolved to forestall a debacle 
that would end this remarkable dynasty of Syrian women. She persuaded 
Elagabalus to adopt his cousin Alexander as successor and Caesar. She and 
Mamaea trained the boy in the duties of his office, and by every art drew the 
Senate and the people to look upon him as a desirable alternative to the 
priestly satyr who had offended Rome not by his extravagance or obscenity, 
but by his subordination of Jupiter to a Syrian Baal. Soaemias discovered 
the plot, and stirred up the Praetorians against her sister and nephew; Maesa 
and Mamaea offered richer arguments; and the Guard slew Elagabalus and 
his mother, dragged his corpse through the streets and around the Circus, 
and flung it into the Tiber. The Guard proclaimed, the Senate accepted, 
Alexander as emperor (222). 

Marcus Aurelius Severus Alexander, like his predecessor, mounted the 
throne at the age of fourteen. His mother had given herself with singular 
consecration to the training of his body, mind, and character. He strength- 
ened his frame with labor and exercise, swam in a cold pool for an hour 
every day, drank a pint of water before each meal, ate sparingly and of the 
simplest foods. He grew into a handsome youth, tall and strong, skilled in 
every sport and in the arts of war. He studied Greek and Latin literature, 
and only moderated his love for them on the insistence of Mamaea, who 
quoted to him those verses of Virgil that called upon Romans to yield the 
graces of culture to others, and form themselves to organize a world state 
and rule it in peace. He painted and sang “with distinction,” and played the 
organ and the lyre, but never allowed any but his own household to witness 
these performances. He dressed and behaved with modest simplicity, “was 
temperate in the enjoyment of love, and would have nothing to do with 
catamites.” He showed high respect for the Senate, treated its members 
as his equals, entertained them in his palace, and often joined them in their 
homes. Kindly and affable, he visited the sick without distinction of class, 



626 CAESAR AND CHI^IST (CHAP. XXIX 

gave ready audience to any citizen of decent repute, quickly forgave op- 
ponents, and shed no civilian blood in the fourteen years of his reignd* 
His mother reproved his amiability, saying, “You have made your rule too 
gentle, and the authority of the Empire less respected”; to which he an- 
swered, “Yes, but I have made it more lasting and secure.” He was a man 
of gold, without the alloy required to withstand the rough usage of this 
world. 

He recognized the absurdity of his cousin’s effort to replace Jove with 
Elagabal, and he co-operated with his mother in restoring the Roman tem- 
ples and ritual. But to his philosophic mind it seemed that all religions were 
diverse prayers to one supreme power; he wished to honor all honest faiths; 
and in his private chapel, where he worshiped every morning, he had icons 
of Jupiter, Orpheus, Apollonius of Tyana, Abraham, and Christ. He quoted 
frequently the Judaeo-Christian counsel: “What you do not wish a man 
to do to you, do not do to him”; he had it engraved on the walls of his palace 
and on many a public building. He recommended the morals of the Jews 
and the Christians to the Roman people. The unimpressed wits of Antioch 
and Alexandria referred to him as “Head of the Synagogue.” His mother 
favored the Christians, protected Origen, and summoned him to explain to 
her his flexible theology. 

Juha Maesa having died soon after Alexander’s accession, Mamaea, with 
his tutor Ulpian, determined the policies, and conceived the reforms, of 
Alexander’s administration. She ruled with wisdom and restraint, caring 
more for the success of the dynasty than for the pageantry of power; she 
yielded to the great lawyer and the young emperor the credit for the achieve- 
ments of his reign. She and Ulpian chose sixteen outstanding senators to 
serve as an imperial council, without whose approval no major measures 
were carried out. She could control everything except her love for her son. 
When he married and showed an affectionate partiality for his wife, Mamaea 
had her banished, and Alexander, forced to choose, surrendered to his 
mother. As he grew older he took a more active part in administration. “He 
would give his attention to public business even before dawn,” says his 
ancient biographer, “and would continue at it to an advanced hour, never 
growing weary or irritated, but always cheerful and serene.” 

His basic policy was to weaken the disruptive dominance of the army by 
restoring the prestige of the Senate and the aristocracy; rule by birth seemed 
to him the only actual alternative to rule by money, myth, or the sword. 
With the co-operation of the Senate he eflFected a hundred economies in 
administration, dismissed the supernumeraries in his palace, in governmental 
offices, and in provincial rule. He sold most of the imperial jewelry, and 
deposited the proceeds in the treasury. Perhaps with less Senatorial approval 



CHAP.XXIX) THE COLLAPSE OF THE EMPIRE 627 

he legalized, encouraged, and reorganized the workers’ and tradesmen’s 
associations, and “allowed them to have advocates chosen from their own 
numbers.” Assuming a severe censorship over pubhc morals, he ordered 
the arrest of prostitutes and the deportation of homosexuals. While reduc- 
ing taxes, he restored the Colosseum and the Baths of Caracalla, built a 
public hbrary, a fourteen-mile aqueduct, and new municipal baths, and 
financed the construction of baths, aqueducts, bridges, and roads throughout 
the Empire. To force down interest rates that were harassing debtors, he 
lent public money at four per cent, and advanced funds to the poor, with- 
out any interest charge, for the purchase of agricultural land. All the Em- 
pire prospered and applauded; the godly Aurelius, it seemed, had returned 
to earth and to power. 

But as the Persians and the Germans had taken advantage of the philoso- 
pher king, so now they took advantage of the emperor saint. In 2 30 Ardashir, 
founder of the Sassanid dynasty in Persia, invaded Mesopotamia and threat- 
ened Syria. Alexander sent him a philosophical epistle reproving his violence, 
and arguing that “everyone ought to rest content with his own domain.” 
Ardashir judged him a weakling, and replied by demanding all Syria and 
Asia Alinor. Accompanied by his mother, the young emperor took the field, 
and waged with more courage than subtlety an indecisive campaign. His- 
tory is obscure as to his victories and defeats; in any case Ardashir withdrew 
from Aiesopotamia, perhaps to meet attacks on his eastern front; and the 
Roman coins of 233 pictured Alexander crowned by Victory and having 
the Tigris and Euphrates at his feet. 

Meanwhile the Alemanni and the Marcomanni, noting that the Rhine 
and Danube garrisons had been depleted to reinforce the legions in Syria, 
broke through the Roman limes and rav^aged eastern Gaul. After celebrating 
his Persian triumph, Alexander, again with Alamaea at his side, rejoined his 
army, and led it to Mainz. On his mother’s advice he negotiated with the 
enemy, offering them an annual sum to keep the peace. His troops con- 
demned his weakness, and mutinied; they had never forgiven his economy, 
his discipline, and his subordination of them to the Senate and a woman’s 
rule. They acclaimed as emperor C. Julius Maximinus, commander of the 
Pannonian legions. The soldiers of Alaximinus forced their way into Alex- 
ander’s tent, and slew him, his mother, and his friends (235). 


II. ANARCHY 


It was no whim of history that made the army supreme in the third cen- 
tury; internal causes had weakened the state and left it exposed on every 



628 CAESAR AND CHRIST (cHAP. XXIX 

front. The cessation of expansion after Trajan, and again after Septimius 
Severus, was the signal for attack; and as Rome had conquered, nations by 
dividing them, so now the barbarians began to conquer her by uniting in 
simultaneous assaults. The necessity of defense exalted the power of arms 
and the prestige of soldiery; generals replaced philosophers on the throne, 
an d the last reign of the aristocracy yielded to the revived rule of force. 

Maximinus was a good soldier and no more, the robust son of a Thracian 
peasant; history assures us that he was eight feet tall, and had a thumb of 
such circumference that he could wear his wife’s bracelet on it as a ring. 
He had no education, scorned it, and envied it. In his three years as emperor 
he never visited Rome, but preferred the life of his camp on the Danube or 
the Rhine. To support his campaigns and appease his troops, he laid such 
taxes upon the well to do that an upper-class revolt soon formed against his 
rule. Gordianus, the wealthy and learned proconsul of Africa, accepted the 
nomination of his army as a rival emperor; being eighty years old, he asso- 
ciated his son with him in the lethal office; they failed to withstand the 
forces sent against them by Maximinus; the son was killed in battle, the 
father killed himself. Maximinus revenged himself by proscriptions and 
confiscations that almost destroyed the aristocracy, “Every day,” says 
Herodian, “one could see the richest men of yesterday turned beggars 
today.” The Senate, which had been reconstituted and reinvigorated by 
Severus, fought back valiantly; it declared Ma.ximinus an outlaw, and chose 
two of its members, Maximus and Balbinus, as emperors. Maximus led an 
improvised army to meet Maximinus, who came down across the Alps and 
besieged Aquileia. Maximinus was the better general, and had the superior 
forces; the fate of the Senate and the propertied classes seemed sealed; but 
a group of Maximinus’ soldiers, who had suffered from his savage punish- 
ments, killed him in his tent. Maximus returned in triumph to Rome, and 
was assassinated, along with Balbinus, by the Praetorian Guard. The Prae- 
torians made a third Gordian emperor, and the Senate confirmed the choice. 

We shall not repeat in bloody detail the names and battles and deaths of 
these emperors of anarchy. In the thirty-five years between Alexander 
Severus and Aurelian, thirty-seven men were proclaimed emperors. Gordian 
III was slain by his troops while fighting the Persians (244); his successor, 
Philip the Arab, was defeated and killed at Verona by Decius (249), an 
Illyrian of wealth and culture whose devotion to Rome well deserved a 
name so honorable in ancient story. Between campaigns against the Goths 
he laid out an ambitious program for the restoration of Roman religion, 
morals, and character, and gave orders for the destruction of Christianity^ 
then he returned to the Danube, met the Goths, saw his son slain beside him’ 
told his wavering army that the loss of any one individual was of little 

# 



CHAP.XXIX) THE COLLAPSE OF THE EMPIRE 629 

importance, pressed on against the enemy, and was himself struck down in 
one of the worst defeats in Roman history (251). He was succeeded by 
Callus, who was murdered by his troops (253), and then by Aemilianus, 
who was murdered by his troops (253). 

The new emperor. Valerian, already sixty, and facing war at once with 
the Franks, the Alemanni, the JVIarcomanni, the Goths, the Scythians, and 
the Persians, made his son Gallienus ruler of the Western Empire, kept the 
East for himself, and led an army into Mesopotamia. He was too old for 
his tasks, and soon succumbed. Gallienus, now thirty-five, was a man of 
courage, intelligence, and a culture that seemed almost out of place in this 
century of barbaric war. He reformed the civilian administration in the 
West, led his armies to victory against one after another of the Empire’s 
enemies, and yet found time to enjoy and patronize philosophy and litera- 
ture, and promote a transient revival of classic art. But even his varied genius 
was overwhelmed by the accumulating evils of the time. 

In 254 the Marcomanni raided Pannonia and north Italy. In 255 the Goths 
invaded Macedonia and Dalmatia, Scythians and Goths invaded Asia Minor, 
the Persians invaded Syria. In 257 the Goths captured the fleet of the Bos- 
poran kingdom, ravaged the Greek cities on the Black Sea coasts, burned 
Trapezus and enslaved its people, and raided Pontus. In 258 they took 
Chalcedon, Nicomedia, Prusa, Apamea, Nicaea; in the same year the Per- 
sians conquered Armenia, and Postumus declared himself the independent 
ruler of Gaul. In 259 the Alemanni broke into Italy, but were defeated by 
Gallienus at Milan. In 260 Valerian was overwhelmed by the Persians at 
Edessa, and died in captivity at a time and place unknown. Shapur I and 
his clouds of cavalry advanced through Syria to Antioch, surprised the 
population in the midst of its games, sacked the city, killed thousands, and 
led more thousands into slavery. Tarsus was taken and devastated, Cilicia 
and Cappadocia were overrun, and Shapur returned to Persia laden with 
spoils. Within a decade three ignominious tragedies had overtaken Rome: 
a Roman emperor had for the first time fallen in defeat, another had been 
captured by the enemy, and the unity of the Empire had been sacrificed to 
the necessity of meeting simultaneous attacks on many fronts. Under the 
force of these blows, and the disorderly elevation and assassination of em- 
perors by troops, the imperial prestige collapsed; those psychological forces 
which time consecrates into habitual and unquestioned authority lost their 
hold upon Rome’s enemies, even upon her subjects and citizens. Revolts 
broke out everywhere: in Sicily and Gaul the oppressed peasantry flared 
up in wild jacqueries; in Pannonia Ingenuus proclaimed himself sovereign 
of the eastern provinces. In 263 the Goths sailed down the Ionian coast. 



630 CAESAR AND CHRIST (CHAP. XXIX 

sacked Ephesus, and burned down the great Temple of Artemis. All the 
Hellenistic East was in terror. 

An unexpected ally saved the Empire in Asia. Odenathus, who governed 
Palmyra as a vassal of Rome, drove the Persians back across Mesopotamia, 
defeated them at Ctesiphon (261), and declared himself king of Syria, 
Cilicia, Arabia, Cappadocia, and Armenia. He was assassinated in 266; his 
youthful son succeeded to his titles, his widow to his power. Like Cleopatra, 
from whom she claimed descent, Zenobia combined beauty of person with 
statesmanly capacity and many accompHshments of mind. She studied Greek 
literature and philosophy, learned Latin, Egyptian, and Syriac, and wrote 
a history of the East. Apparently connecting chastity with vigor, she 
allowed herself only such sexual relations as were needed for motherhood.^® 
She inured herself to hardship and fatigue, enjoyed the dangers of the chase 
and marched on foot for miles at the head of her troops. She governed with 
sternness and wisdom, made the philosopher Longinus her premier, gathered 
scholars, poets, and artists at her court, and beautified her capital with 
Greco-Roman-Asiatic palaces whose ruins startle the desert traveler today. 
Eeehng that the Empire was breaking up, she planned a new dynasty and 
realm, brought Cappadocia, Galatia, and most of Bithynia under her con- 
trol, fitted out a great army and fleet, conquered Egypt, and took Alexandria 
after a siege that destroyed half the population. The subtle “Queen of the 
East” pretended that she was proceeding as the agent of the Roman power; 
but all the world knew that her victories were an act in the spacious drama 
of Rome’s collapse. 

Seeing the wealth and weakness of the Empire, the barbarians poured 
down into the Balkans and Greece. While the Sarmatians pillaged again 
the cities on the Black Sea, a branch of the Goths sailed in 500 ships through 
the Hellespont into the Aegean, took isle after isle, anchored in the Piraeus, 
and sacked Athens, Argos, Sparta, Corinth, and Thebes (267). While their 
navy brought some of the marauders back to the Black Sea, another group 
fought its way overland towards its Danube home. Gallienus met them at 
the river Nestus in Thrace, and won a costly victory; but a year later he 
was murdered by his troops. In 269 another Gothic horde descended into 
Macedonia, besieged Thessalonica, and pillaged Greece, Rhodes, Cyprus, 
and the Ionian coast. The Emperor Claudius II rescued Thessalonica, drove 
the Goths up the Vardar valley, and defeated them with great slaughter at 
Naissus, the modem Nish (269). If he had lost that battle no army would 
have intervened between the Goths and Italy. 



CHAP.XXIX) THE COLLAPSE OF THE EMPIRE 


631 


ra. THE ECONOMIC DECLINE 

Political anarchy accelerated economic disintegration, and economic 
decline promoted political decay; each was the cause and effect of the 
other. Roman statesmanship had never found a healthy economic life for 
Italy; and perhaps the narrow plains of the peninsula have never provided 
an adequate base for the soaring aims of the Italian state. The production 
of cereals was discouraged by the competition of cheap grains from Sicily, 
Africa, and Egypt, and the great vineyards were losing their markets to 
provincial wines. Farmers complained that high taxes consumed their pre- 
carious profits and left them too httle to keep the drainage and irrigation 
canals in repair; the canals filled up, the marshes spread, and malaria weak- 
ened the population of the Campagna and Rome. Large tracts of fertile land 
had been withdrawn from cultivation for residential estates. The absentee 
owners of the latifundia exploited labor and the soil to the limit of tolerance, 
and absolved themselves by philanthropies in the towns; urban architecture 
and games profited while the countryside grew desolate. Many peasant pro- 
prietors and free rural workers abandoned the farms for the cities, leaving 
Italian agriculture for the most part to latifundia manned by listless slaves. 
But the latifundia themselves were ruined by the Pax Rofmna, the dearth 
of wars of conquest in the first and second centuries, and the consequent 
fall in the supply, and rise in the cost, of slaves. Compelled to lure free 
labor back to the land, the great landlords divided their holdings into units 
which they leased to coloni, “cultivators”; they required from these tenants 
a small money rent or a tenth of the produce, and a period of unpaid labor 
in the owner’s villa or on his private domain. In many cases landlords found 
it profitable to emancipate their slaves and change them into coloni. In the 
third century the owners, harassed by invasion and revolution in the cities, 
took more and more to hving in their villas; these were fortified into castles, 
and were gradually transformed into medieval chateaux.* 

The lack of slaves strengthened for a time the position of free labor in 
industry as well as in agriculture. But while the resources of the rich were 

* The “colonate” probably had a major beginning when Aurelius settled captive Germans 
on imperial estates (172), and gave them hereditary possession on condition of an annual tax, 
military service at call, and an agreement not to leave their allotment without permission of 
the state. Similar conditions were laid upon Roman veterans receiving frontier lands, espe- 
cially in the agri dect/wafer— “tithe-paying fields”— along the Danube and Rhine.21 A great 
extension of this imperial colonate occurred under Septimius Severus, who divided the lands 
he had appropriated into parcels tilled by tenants paying taxes in money or kind. As Septimius 
imitated the Ptolemies, so private landowners imitated him; the colonate began with mon- 
archs, and produced a feudalism that undermined monarchy. 




CAESAR AND CHRIST 


632 


(chap. XXIX 


consumed by war and government, the poverty of the poor did not de- 
crease. Wages were from six to eleven, prices some thirty-three, per cent 
of comparative wages and prices in the United States of the early twentieth 
century.^® The class struggle was becoming more violent, for the army, 
recruited from the provincial poor, often joined in the attack upon wealth, 
and felt that its services to the state justified confiscatory taxation for dona- 
tives, or more direct pillaging of the well to do.^^ Industry suffered as 
commerce declined. Tbe export trade of Italy fell as the provinces graduated 
from customers to competitors; barbarian raids and piracy made trade routes 
as unsafe as before Pompey; depreciated currencies and uncertain prices 
discouraged long-term enterprise. The extension of the frontier having 
ceased, Italy could no longer prosper by supplying or exploiting an expand- 
ing realm. Once Italy had collected the bullion of conquered lands and 
grown rich on the robbery; now money was migrating to the more indus- 
trialized Hellenistic provinces, and Italy grew poorer while the rising 
wealth of Asia Minor forced the replacement of Rome with an Eastern 
capital. Italian industry was thrown back upon its domestic market, and 
found the people too poor to buy the goods they could make.^® Internal 
commerce was hampered by brigands, rising taxes, and the deterioration of 
roads through lack of slaves. The villas became more self-sufficient in 
industry, and barter competed with money trade. Large-scale production 
gave way year by year to small shops supplying chiefly a local demand. 

Financial difficulties entered. The precious metals were running low: the 
gold mines of Thrace and the silver mines of Spain had reduced their yield, 
and Dacia, with its gold, would soon be surrendered by Aurelian. Much 
gold and silver had been consumed in art and ornament. Faced with this 
dearth when war was almost continuous, the emperors from Septimius 
Severus onward repeatedly debased the currency to pay for state expenses 
and military supplies. Under Nero the alloy in the denarius was ten per 
cent, under Commodus thirty, under Septimius fifty. Caracalla replaced 
it with the antonimamis , containing fifty per cent silver; by 260 its silver 
content had sunk to five per cent.-® The government mints issued unprece- 
dented quantities of cheap coin; in many instances the state compelled the 
acceptance of these at their face value instead of their actual worth, while 
it insisted that taxes should be paid in goods or gold.^^ Prices rose rapidly; 
in Palestine they increased one thousand per cent between the first and third 
centuries;^® in Egypt inflation ran out of control, so that a measure of 
wheat that had cost eight drachmas in the first century cost 1 20,000 drachmas 
at the end of the third.-® Other provinces suffered much less; but in most of 
them inflation ruined a large part of the middle class, nulhfied trust funds 
and charitable foundations, rendered all business discouragingly precarious, 



CHAP.XXIX) THE COLLAPSE OF THE EMPIRE 633 

and destroyed a considerable portion of the trading and investment capital 
upon. which the economic life of the Empire depended. 

The emperors after Pertinax were not displeased by this attrition of the 
aristocracy and the bourgeoisie. They felt the hostility of the Senatorial 
class and the great merchants to their aUen origin, their martial despotism, 
and their exactions; the war of Senate and emperor, interrupted from 
Nerva to Aurelius, was renewed; and by donatives, pubhc works, and 
doles, the rulers deliberately based their powers upon the favor of the army, 
the proletariat, and the peasantry. 

The Empire suffered only less than Italy. Carthage and north Africa, 
farthest from the invaders, flourished; but Egypt decayed under destructive 
factionalism, Caracalla’s massacre, Zenobia’s conquest, high taxes, listless 
forced labor, and Rome’s annual exaction of grain. Asia Minor and Syria 
had borne invasion and pillaging, but their ancient and patient industries 
had survived all tribulations. Greece, Macedonia, and Thrace had been 
devastated by the barbarians, and Byzantium had not recovered from Sep- 
timius’ siege. As war brought Roman garrisons and supplies to the German 
frontier new cities rose along the rivers— Vienna, Karlsburg, Strasbourg, 
Mainz. Gaul had been disordered and discouraged by German attacks; sixty 
of her cities had been sacked; most of her towns and cities were shrinking 
within new walls, and were abandoning the broad straight streets of Roman 
design for the more easily defended irregular alleys of early antiquity and 
the Middle Ages. In Britain, too, the cities were becoming smaller, the villas 
larger; class war and high taxation had destroyed wealth or driven it into 
rural concealment. The Empire had begun with urbanization and civiliza- 
tion; it was ending in reruralization and barbarism. 


rv. THE TWILIGHT OF PAGANISM 

The cultural graph of the third century follows loosely the curve of 
declining wealth and power. Nevertheless, in these tragic years we have the 
rise of notational algebra, the highest names in Roman jurisprudence, the 
finest example of ancient literary criticism, some of Rome’s most majestic 
architecture, the oldest romantic novels, the greatest of mystic philosophers. 

The Greek A 7 ithology summarizes the life of Diophantus of Alexandria (a.d. 
250) with algebraic humor: his boyhood lasted one sixth of his life, his beard 
grew after one twelfth more, he married after another seventh, his son was 
bom five years later and lived to half his father’s age, and the father died four 
years after his son— therefore at the age of eighty-four.®^ Of his works the chief 



634 CAESAR AND CHRIST (CHAP. XXES 

survivor is the Arithmetic a— ^ treatise on algebra. It solves determinate equations 
of the first degree, determinate quadratic equations, and indeterminate equa- 
tions up to the sixth degree. For the unknown quantity which we denote by 
Xy and which he called arithmos (the number)— he used a Greek sigma; and for 
the other powers he used the letters of the Greek alphabet. An algebra w’ithout 
symbols had existed before him; Plato had recommended, for training and amus- 
ing the youthful mind, such problems as the distribution of apples in certain 
proportions among several persons; Archimedes had propounded like puzzles 
in the third century b.c.; and both the Egyptians and the Greeks had solved 
geometrical problems by algebraic methods without algebraic notation. Prob- 
ably Diophantus systematized methods already familiar to his contemporaries; 
the accident of time has preserved him; and to him, through the Arabs, we trace 
that bold and esoteric symbolism which aspires to formulate all the quantitative 
relations of the world. 

Papinian, Paulus, and Ulpian, the culminating trio of Roman law, all rose to 
power under Septimius Severus; all, as prefects of the Praetorian Guard, were 
the prime ministers of the realm; and all justified absolute monarchy on the 
ground that the people had delegated their sovereignty to the emperor. Papinian’s 
Quaestimes and Responsa were so distinguished by clarity, humanity, and justice 
that Justinian’s collections leaned heavily on these works. When Caracalla killed 
Geta, he bade Papinian write a legal defense of the act; Papinian refused, saying 
that it was “easier to commit fratricide than to justify it.” Caracalla ordered him 
beheaded, and a soldier performed the deed with an ax in the presence of the 
Emperor. Domitius Ulpianus continued Papinian’s labors as jurist and humani- 
tarian. His legal opinions defended slaves as by nature free, and women as 
endowed with the same rights as men.®* Like most landmarks in the history of 
law, his writings were essentially a co-ordination of his predecessors’ work; 
but his judgments were so definitive that nearly a third of them survive in the 
Digest of Justinian. “It was because Alexander Severus ruled chiefly in accord 
with Ulpian’s advice,” says Lampridius, “that he was so excellent an emperor.” 
However, Ulpian had had some of his opponents put to death; and in 2z8 his 
enemies in the Guard killed him in turn, with less legality and equal eJffect. 
Diocletian encouraged and financed schools of law, and commissioned the codifi- 
cation of post-Trajanic legislation in the Codex Gregorianus. Thereafter the 
science of jurisprudence hibernated till Justinian. 

The third century continued the art of painting on Pompeian and Alex- 
andrian lines; its meager remains are Oriental and crude, and almost effaced by 
time. Sculpture flourished, for many emperors had to be carved; it stiffened 
into a primitive frontality, but no later age has surpassed this one in portraits 
of startling veracity. It is a credit to Caracalla, or a testimony to his dullness, 
that he allowed a sculptor to transmit him to us as the curlyheaded scowling 
brute of the Naples Museum. Two scvilptural colossi date from this period: 
the Fctmese Bull and the Famese Hercules, both of them exaggerated and un- 
pleasantly tense, but showing undiminished technical mastery. That sculptors 



CHAP.XXIX) THE COLLAPSE OF THE EMPIRE 635 

could still work in the classic style appears from the chaste reliefs on the sar- 
cophagus of Alexander Severus, and on the Ludovisi Battle Sarcophagus. But 
the reliefs on the Arch of Septimius Severus at Rome frankly rejected Attic sim- 
plicity and grace for a coarse and picturesque virility that almost foreshadowed 
the rebarbarization of Italy. 

Architecture at Rome now carried to completion the Roman flair for sub- 
limity through size. Septimius raised on the Palatine the last of its imperial palaces, 
with an eastern wing seven stories high— the “Septizonium.” Julia Domna pro- 
vided funds for the Atrium Vestae, and the pretty Temple of Vesta that still 
stands in the Forum. Caracalla built for Isis’ consort Serapis an immense shrine 
of which some handsome fragments survive. The Baths of Caracalla, finished 
under Alexander Severus, are among the world’s most impressive ruins. They 
added nothing to architectural science, following essentially the lines of Trajan’s 
Baths; but their frowning mass well expressed the murderer of Geta and Papinian. 
The main block, of brick and concrete, covered 270,000 square feet— more than 
the Houses of Parliament and Westminster Hall combined. A winding stair- 
way led to the top of the walls; perched there Shelley wrote Brometheus Un- 
bound. The interior was garrisoned by a multitude of statues, and upheld by 
200 columns of granite, alabaster, and porphyry; the marble floors and walls 
were inlaid with mosaic scenes; water poured from massive mouths of silver 
into pools and basins where 1600 persons could bathe at once. Gallienus and 
Decius raised similar baths; in the latter case the Roman engineers rested a circular 
dome upon a decagonal edifice, and supported it with buttresses in the angles 
of the decagon— an expedient with little past and much future. In 295 Maximian 
began the most enormous of the eleven imperial thermae, and named it with 
singular modesty the Baths of Diocletian. Here were bathing facilities for 3600 
persons at one time, gymnasiums, concert and lecture halls; out of one room, 
the tepidarium, Michelangelo fashioned Santa Maria degli Angeli— with the 
exception of St. Peter’s the largest church in Rome. Structures only less monu- 
mental rose in the provinces. Diocletian built extensively in Nicomedia, Alex- 
andria, and Antioch; Maximian adorned Milan, Galerius Sirmium, Constantins 
Treves. 

Literature prospered less, for it could seldom tap the wealth that gathered in 
imperial hands. Libraries grew in number and size; a third-century physician had 
a collection of 62,000 volumes, and the Bibliotheca Ulpiana was renowned for 
its historical archives. Diocletian sent scholars to Alexandria to transcribe classi- 
cal texts there and bring copies to the hbraries of Rome. Scholars were plentiful 
and popular; Philostratus memorialized them well in his Lives of the Sophists. 
Porphyry continued Plotinus, attacked Christianity, and called the world to 
vegetarianism. lamblichus tried to harmonize Platonism and pagan theology, and 
succeeded sufficiently to inspire the Emperor Julian. Diogenes Laertius put to- 
gether the lives and opinions of the philosophers in fascinating excerpt and 
anecdote. Athenaeus of Naucratis, having consumed the libraries of Alexandria, 
poured his chyme into the Deipnosophists, or “Sophists of the Dinner Table” 



636 CAESAR AND CHRIST (CHAP. XXIX 

—a dreary dialogue on foods, sauces, courtesans, philosophers, and words, bright- 
ened here and there by some revelation of ancient custom or some reminiscence 
of great men. Longinus, perhaps of Palmyra, composed a polished essay Peri 
hypsus, “On the Sublime”; the peculiar pleasure given by literature (runs the 
argument) is due to the “lifting up” (ekstasis) of the reader by the eloquence 
that comes to a writer from strength of conviction and sincerity of character.* 
Dio Cassius Cocceianus of Bithynian Nicaea, after a life spent in the cursus 
honorum, began at fifty-five to write his History of Rome (2 10.' ) ; in his seventy- 
fourth year he completed it, having carried the story down from Romulus to 
himself. Of its eighty “books” less than half remain, but they fill eight substan- 
tial volumes. It is a work of noble scope rather than high quality. It has vivid 
narratives, revealing speeches, and philosophical asides that are not always plati- 
tudinous and conservative. But, like Livy, it is disfigured with “portents”; like 
Tacitus it is a long brief for the Senatorial opposition; and like all Roman his- 
tories it cleaves narrowly to the vicissitudes of politics and war— as if life for a 
thousand years had been nothing but taxes and death. 

More significant than these honorable men for the historian of the mind is the 
appearance, in this century, of the romantic novel. It had had a long prepara- 
tion in the Cyropcddeia of Xenophon, the love poems of Callimachus, the legends 
that had accumulated about Alexander, and the “Milesian Tales” told by Aristides 
and others in the second century b.c. and afterward. These stories of adventure 
and love pleased an Ionian populace so classic in tradition but so Oriental in 
mood, perhaps now Oriental in blood. Petronius in Rome, Apuleius in Africa, 
Lucian in Greece, lamblichus in Syria, developed the picaresque romance in 
varied ways, with no special accent on love. In the first Christian centuries, pos- 
sibly responding to an increasing audience of women readers, the novel of ad- 
venture merged with the romance of love. 

Our oldest extant example is the Aethiopica, or “Egyptian Tales,” of Heli- 
odorus of Emesa. Of its date there is much dispute, but we may provisionally 
assign it to the third century. It begins in a style honorable with age: 

The day had begun to smile cheerily, and the sun was already 
brightening the tops of the hills, when a band of men, in arms and 
appearance pirates, having ascended the summit of a slope that over- 
looks the Heracleotic mouth of the Nile, paused and surveyed the sea. 
Finding no sail there to promise them booty, they turned their eyes 
to the shore beneath them; and this is what they saw.®^ 

At once we meet the rich and handsome youth Theagenes, and the lovely 
and tearful princess Chariclea; they have been captured by pirates; and there 

• The oldest mss. assign the essay in one case to “Dionysius Longinus,” in the other to 
“Dionysi^ or Longmus,” without funher clue. The only literary Longinus known to us 
from antiquity is Cassius Longinus, Zenobia’s premier. He was famous throughout the Em- 
pire for his learning; Eunapius called him “a living library,” and Porphyry ranked him “the 
first of critics.” r / / 



CHAP.XXIX) THE COLLAPSE OF THE EMPIRE 637 

befalls them such a medley of mishaps, misunderstandings, battles, murders, and 
reunions as might supply a season’s fiction today. Whereas in Petronius and 
Apuleius the chastity of maidens is a matter of swiftly passing concern, it is here 
the essence and pivot of the tale: Heliodorus preserves Chariclea’s virginity 
through a score of narrow escapes, and writes persuasive homilies on the beauty 
and necessity of feminine virtue. There may be here some Christian influence; 
indeed, tradition made the author become the Christian bishop of Thessalonica. 
The Aethiopica unwittingly fathered an endless chain of imitations: here is the 
model for Cervantes’ Persiles y Sigisniunda, the story of Clorinda in Tasso’s 
Jerusalem Delivered, and the vast romances of Mme de Scudery; here are the 
love potions, signs, moans, faintings, and happy endings of a million pleasant 
tales; here is Clarissa Harlovoe 1 500 years before Richardson. 

The most famous love story in ancient prose was Daphiis and Chloe. Of its 
author we know only the name Longus; and we merely guess at the third cen- 
tury as his time. Daphnis is exposed at birth, is rescued and reared by a shepherd, 
and becomes a shepherd in turn. Excellent passages of rural description suggest 
that Longus, like his poetic model Theocritus, had discovered the country after 
long residence in the city. Daphnis falls in love with a peasant girl who has also 
been rescued from infant exposure; they tend their flocks in charming com- 
radeship, bathe together in innocent nudity, and intoxicate each other with an 
unprecedented kiss. An old neighbor explains their fever to them, and describes 
from his own youth the sickness of romantic love. “I thought not of my food, 
I cared not for my drink. I could take no rest, and sleep deserted me. My soul 
was heavy with sadness, my heart beat quickly, my limbs felt a deadly chill.” 

In the end their fathers, now wealthy, discover and enrich them; but they ignore 
their wealth and return to their modest pastoral life. The tale is told with the 
simplicity of finished art. Translated into supple French by Amyot (1559), it 
became the model for Saint-Pierre’s Paul and Virginia, and the inspiration of 
countless paintings, poems, and musical compositions. 

Akin to it is a fragment of poetry known as Pervigilium Veneris, “The Eve 
of Venus.” No one knows who wrote it, or when; probably it belongs to this 
century.^® The theme is that of Lucretius’ apostrophe and Longus’ romance— 
that the goddess of love, by inflaming all living things with reckless desire, is the 
real creator of the world: 

Tomorrow shall he love who never loved; 

Tomorrow shall he love who loved before. 

Fresh spring has come, and sings her amorous song; 

The world is bom anew, and vernal love 
Drives birds to mate, and all the waiting woods 
Unloose their tresses to the showers of spring. 

Tomorrow shall he love who never loved. 

And he shall love who loved before. 



638 CAESAR AND CHRIST (CHAP. XXIX 

So the limpid verse flows on, finding the work of love in the fertilizing rain, in 
the forms of flowers, in the songs of merry festivals, in the awkward tentatives 
of desirous youth, in timid trysts amid woodland haunts; and after each stanza 
the pithy promise returns: Cras amet qui numqucmi amavit, quique amavit eras 
amet. Here, in the last great lyric poem of the pagan soul, we hear the trochaic 
cadence of medieval hymns, and a melodious premonition of the troubadours. 


V. THE ORIENTAL MONARCHY 

When Claudius II died of a pestilence that was decimating Goths and 
Romans alike (270), the army chose as his successor the son of an Illyrian 
peasant. Domitius Aurelianus had risen from the lowest ranks by strength 
of body and will; his nickname was Mami ad ferrimi— “hand on sword.” It 
was a sign of reawakened good sense in the army that it chose a man who 
exacted as hard a discipline from others as from himself. 

Under his lead the enemies of Rome were repulsed at every point except 
the Danube. There Aurelian ceded Dacia to the Goths, hoping that they 
would stand as a barrier between the Empire and ulterior hordes. Perhaps 
encouraged by this surrender, the Alemanni and the Vandals invaded Italy; 
but Aurelian in three battles overcame and dispersed them. Meditating dis- 
tant campaigns, and fearing an assault upon Rome during his absence, he 
persuaded the Senate to finance, and the guilds to erect, new walls around 
the capital. Everywhere in the Empire city walls were being built, signifying 
the weakening of the imperial power and the end of the Roman peace. 

Preferring offense to defense, Aurelian determined to restore the Empire 
by attacking Zenobia in the East, and then Tetricus, who had succeeded 
Postumus as the usurper of sovereignty in Gaul. While his general Probus 
recovered Egypt from Zenobia’s son, Aurelian marched through the Balkans, 
crossed the Hellespont, defeated the Queen’s army at Emesa, and besieged 
her capital. She tried to escape and enlist Persia’s aid, but was captured; the 
city surrendered and was spared, but Longinus was put to death (272). 
While the Emperor was leading his army back to the Hellespont, Palmyra 
revolted and slew the garrison he had left there. He turned about with the 
speed of Caesar, again besieged and soon took the city; now he abandoned 
it to pillage by his troops, razed its walls, rerouted its trade, and let it lapse 
into the desert village that it had been before and is today. Zenobia graced 
in golden chains Aurelian’s triumph in Rome, and was allowed to spend her 
remaining years in comparative freedom at Tibur. 

In 274 Aurelian defeated Tetricus at Chalons, and returned Gaul, Spain, 
and Britain to the Empire. Happy at the resumption of its mastery, Rome 



CHAP.XXrx) THE COLLAPSE OF THE EMPIRE 639 

hailed the victor as restitutor orbis, restorer of the world. Turning to 
the tasks of peace, he re-established some economic order by reforming the 
Roman coinage; and reorganized the government by applying to it the 
same severe discipline that had regenerated the army. Ascribing Rome’s 
moral and political chaos in some degree to religious disunity, and im- 
pressed by the political services of religion in the East, he sought to unite 
old faiths and new in a monotheistic worship of the sun-god, and of the 
Emperor as the vicar of that deity on earth. He informed a skeptical army 
and Senate that it was the god, and not their choice or confirmation, that 
had made him Emperor. He built at Rome a resplendent Temple of the Sun, 
in which, he hoped, the Baal of Emesa and the god of Mithraism would 
merge. Monarchy and monotheism were advancing side by side, each seek- 
ing to make the other its aide. Aurelian’s religious pohcy suggested that the 
power of the state was falling, that of religion rising; kings were now kings 
by the grace of God. This was the Oriental conception of government, old 
in Egypt, Persia, and Syria; in accepting it Aurelian advanced that Orientali- 
zation of the monarchy which had begun with Elagabalus and would com- 
plete itself in Diocletian and Constantine. 

In 275, as Aurelian was leading an army across Thrace to settle matters 
with Persia, a group of officers, misled into thinking that he planned to 
execute them, assassinated him. Shocked by its ov'n accumulated crimes, the 
army asked the Senate to appoint a successor. None wanted an honor that 
so regularly heralded death; finally Tacitus, being seventy-five years old, 
consented to serve. He claimed descent from the historian, and illustrated 
all the virtues preached by that laconic pessimist; but he died of exhaustion 
six months after taking the crown. The soldiers, repenting their repentance, 
resumed the prerogative of force, and saluted Probus as emperor (276). 

It was an excellent choice and a merited name, for Probus stood out in 
courage and integrity. He expelled the Germans from Gaul, cleared the 
Vandals from Illyricum, built a wall between the Rhine and the Danube, 
frightened the Persians with a word, and gave peace to the whole Roman 
realm. Soon, he pledged his people, there would be no arms, no armies, and 
no wars, and the reign of law would cover the earth. As a prelude to this 
utopia he compelled his troops to clear wastelands, drain marshes, plant 
vines, and perform other public works. The army resented this sublimation, 
murdered him (282), mourned him, and built a monument to his memory. 

It now hailed as imperator one Diodes, the son of a Dalmatian freedman. 
Diocletian, as he henceforth called himself, had risen by brilliant talents 
and flexible scruples to the consulate, a proconsulate, and command of the 
palace guards. He was a man of genius, less skilled in war than in statesman- 



640 CAESAR AND CHRIST (cHAP. XXIX 

ship. He came to the throne after a period of anarchy worse than that which 
had prevailed from the Gracchi to Antony; like Augustus, he pacified all 
parties, protected all frontiers, extended the role of government, and based 
his rule on the aid and sanction of religion. Augustus had created the Em- 
pire, Aurelian had saved it; Diocletian reorganized it. 

His first vital decision revealed the state of the realm and the waning of 
Rome. He abandoned the city as a capital, and made his emperial head- 
quarters at Nicomedia in Asia Minor, a few miles south of Byzantium. The 
Senate still met in Rome, the consuls went through their ritual, the games 
roared on, the streets still bore the noisome pullulation of humanity; but 
power and leadership had gone from this center of economic and moral 
decay. Diocletian based his move on military necessity: Europe and Asia 
must be defended, and could not be defended from a city so far south of 
the Alps. Hence he appointed a capable general, Maximian, as his coruler 
(286), charging him with defense of the West; and Maximian made not 
Rome but Milan his capital. Six years later, to further facilitate administra- 
tion and defense, each of the two Augusti chose a “Caesar” as his aide and 
successor: Diocletian selected Galerius, who made his capital at Sirmium 
(Mitrovica on the Save), and was responsible for the Danube provinces; 
and Maximian appointed Constantins Chlorus (the Pale), who made his 
capital at Augusta Trevirorum (Treves). Each Augustus pledged himself 
to retire after twenty years in favor of his Caesar, who would then appoint 
a “Caesar” to aid and succeed him in turn. Each Augustus gave his daughter 
in marriage to his “Caesar,” adding the ties of blood to those of law. In this 
way, Diocletian hoped, wars of succession would be avoided, government 
would recapture continuity and authority, and the Empire would stand 
on guard at four strategic points against internal rebellion and external 
attack. It was a brilliant arrangement, which had every virtue but unity and 
freedom. 

The monarchy was divided, but it was absolute. Each law of each ruler 
was issued in the name of all four, and was valid for the realm. The edict of 
the rulers became law at once, without the sanction of the Senate at Rome. 
All governmental officials were appointed by the rulers, and a, gigantic 
bureaucracy spread its coils around the state. To further fortify the system, 
Diocletian developed the cult of the Emperor’s genius into a personal wor- 
ship of himself as the earthly embodiment of Jupiter, while Maximian mod- 
estly consented to be Hercules; wisdom and force had come down from 
heaven to restore order and peace on earth. Diocletian assumed a diadem— a 
broad white fillet set with pearls— and robes of silk and gold; his shoes were 
studded with precious gems; he kept himself aloof in his palace, and required 
visitors to pass the gantlet of ceremonious eunuchs and titled chamberlains. 



CHAP.XXIX) THE COLLAPSE OF THE EMPIRE 641 

and to kneel and kiss the hem of his robe. He was a man of the world, and 
doubtless smiled in private at these myths and forms; but his throne lacked 
the legitimacy of time, and he hoped to buttress it, to check the turbulence 
of the populace and the revolts of the army, by enduing himself with divinity 
and awe. “He had himself called dovtimis^' says Aurelius Victor, “but he 
behaved like a father.” This adoption of Oriental despotism by the son of 
a slave, this identification of god and king, meant the final failure of repub- 
lican institutions in antiquity, the surrender of the fruits of Marathon; it 
was a reversion, like Alexander’s, to the forms and theories of Achaemenid 
and Egyptian courts, of Ptolemaic, Parthian, and Sassanid kings. From this 
Orientahzed monarchy came the structure of Byzantine and European king- 
doms till the French Revolution. All that was needed now was to ally the 
Oriental monarch in an Oriental capital with an Oriental faith. Byzantinism 
began with Diocletian. 


VI. THE SOCIALISM OF DIOCLETIAN 

He proceeded with Caesarian energy to remake every branch of the gov- 
ernment. He transformed the aristocracy by raising to it many civil or 
military officials, and making it a hereditary caste with an Oriental grada- 
tion of dignities, profusion of titles, and complexity of etiquette. He and his 
colleagues redivided the Empire into ninety-six provinces grouped into 
seventy-two dioceses and four prefectures, and appointed civil and military 
rulers for each division. It was a frankly centralized state, which considered 
local autonomy, like democracy, a luxury of security and peace, and excused 
its dictatorship by the needs of actual or imminent war. Wars were waged, 
and with brilliant success; Constantius recovered revolted Britain, and 
Galerius defeated the Persians so decisively that they surrendered Meso- 
potamia and five provinces beyond the Tigris. For a generation Rome’s 
enemies were held at bay. 

In years of peace Diocletian, with his aides, faced the problems of eco- 
nomic decay. To overcome depression and prevent revolution he substituted 
a managed economy for the law of supply and demand.^^ He established a 
sound currency by guaranteeing to the gold coinage a fixed weight and 
purity which it retained in the Eastern Empire till 1453. He distributed 
food to the poor at half the market price or free, and undertook extensive 
public works to appease the unemployed.^' To ensure the supply of neces- 
saries for the cities and the armies, he brought many branches of industry 
under complete state control, beginning with the import of grain; he per- 



642 CAESAR AND CHRIST ( CHAP. XXIX 

suaded the shipowners, merchants, and crews engaged in this trade to accept 
such control in return for governmental guarantee of security in employ- 
ment and returns.^® The state had long since owned most quarries, salt 
deposits, and mines; now it forbade the export of salt, iron, gold, wine, 
grain, or oil from Italy, and strictly regulated the importation of these 
articles.^^ It went on to control establishments producing for the army, the 
bureaucracy, or the court. In munition factories, textile mills, and bakeries 
the government required a minimum product, bought this at its own price, 
and made the associations of manufacturers responsible for carrying out 
orders and specifications. If this procedure proved inadequate, it completely 
nationahzed these factories, and manned them with labor bound to the job.^® 
Gradually, under Aurelian and Diocletian, the majority of industrial estab- 
lishments and guilds in Italy were brought under the control of the corporate 
state. Butchers, bakers, masons, builders, glass blowers, ironworkers, en- 
gravers, were ruled by detailed governmental regulations.^® The “various 
corporations,” says Rostovtzelf, “were more like minor supervisors of their 
own concerns on behalf of the state than their owners; they were themselves 
in bondage to the officials of the various departments, and to the commanders 
of the various military units.” The associations of tradesmen and artisans 
received various privileges from the government, and often exerted pressure 
upon its policies; in return they served as organs of national administration, 
helped to regiment labor, and collected taxes for the state from their mem- 
bership.^® Similar methods of governmental control were extended, in the 
late third and early fourth centuries, to provincial armament, food, and 
clothing industries. “In every province,” says Paul-Louis, “special procura- 
tor es superintended industrial activities. In every large town the state became 
a powerful employer . . . standing head and shoulders above the private 
industrialists, who were in any case crushed by taxation.” 

Such a system could not work without price control. In 301 Diocletian 
and his colleagues issued an Edictum de pretiis, dictating maximum legal 
prices or wages for all important articles or services in the Empire. Its pre- 
amble attacks monopolists who, in an “economy of scarcity,” had kept goods 
from the market to raise prices: 

Who is ... so devoid of human feeling as not to see that im- 
moderate prices are widespread in the markets of our cities, and that 
the passion for gain is lessened neither by plentiful supplies nor by 
fruitful years?— so that . . . evil men reckon it their loss if abun- 
dance comes. There are men whose aim it is to restrain general 
prosperity ... to seek usurious and ruinous returns. . . . Avarice 
rages throughout the world. . . . Wherever our armies are com- 
pelled to go for the common safety, profiteers extort prices not merely 



643 


CHAP.XXIX) THE COLLAPSE OF THE EMPIRE 

four or eight times the normal, but beyond any words to describe. 
Sometimes the soldier must exhaust his salary and his bonus in one 
purchase, so that the contributions of the whole world to support the 
armies fall to the abominable profits of thieves.* ^ 

The Edict was until our time the most famous example of an attempt to 
replace economic laws by governmental decrees. Its failure was rapid and 
complete. Tradesmen concealed their commodities, scarcities became more 
acute than before, Diocletian himself was accused of conniving at a rise 
in prices,®^ riots occurred, and the Edict had to be relaxed to restore pro- 
duction and distribution.®^ It was finally revoked by Constantine. 

The weakness of this managed economy lay in its administrative cost. The 
required bureaucracy was so extensive that Lactantius, doubtless with 
political license, estimated it at half the population.®^ The bureaucrats found 
their task too great for human integrity, their surveillance too sporadic for 
the evasive ingenuity of men. To support the bureaucracy, the court, the 
army, the building program, and the dole, taxation rose to unprecedented 
peaks of ubiquitous continuity. As the state had not yet discovered the plan 
of public borrowing to conceal its wastefulness and postpone its reckoning, 
the cost of each year’s operations had to be met from each year’s revenue. 
To avoid returns in depreciating currencies, Diocletian directed that, where 
possible, taxes should be collected in kind: taxpayers were required to trans- 
port their tax quotas to governmental warehouses, and a laborious organiza- 
tion was built up to get the goods thence to their final destination.®® In each 
municipality the decuriones or municipal officials were held financially 
responsible for any shortage in the payment of the taxes assessed upon their 
communities.®® 

Since every taxpayer sought to evade taxes, the state organized a special 
force of revenue police to examine every rtian’s property and income; tor- 
ture was used upon wives, children, and slaves to make them reveal the 
hidden wealth or earnings of the household; and severe penalties were 
enacted for evasion.®^ Towards the end of the third century, and stiff more 
in the fourth, flight from taxes became almost epidemic in the Empire. The 

• Some of the "ceilings” established in the Edict reveal the level of prices and wages in 
A.D. 301. Wheat, lentils, peas, $3.50 a bu.; barley, rye, beans, $2.10 a bu.; wine, 21-26 cents a 
pint; olive oil, 10.5 cents a pint; pork, 10.5 cents a lb., beef or mutton, 7 cents; chickens, 2 for 
52.5 cents; dormice, 10 for 35 cents; best cabbage or lettuce, 5 heads for 3.5 cents; green 
onions, 25 for 3.5 cents; best snails, 20 for 3,5 cents; large apples or peaches, 10 for 3.5 cents; 
figs, 25 for 3.5 cents; hair, 5 cents a lb.; shoes, 62 cents to $1.38 a pair. Wages of farm labor, 
23-46 cents, plus keep, per day; stonemasons, carpenters, blacksmiths, bakers, 46 cents plus 
keep; barbers, $1.75 cents per man; scribes, 23 cents per 100 lines; elementary teachers, 46 
cents per pupil per month; teachers of Greek or Latin literature, or geometry, $1.84 per pupil 
per month; lawyers for pleading a case, 57.36.“^ 



644 CAESAR AND CHRIST (CHAP. XXIX 

well to do concealed their riches, local aristocrats had themselves reclassified 
as humliores to escape election to municipal office, artisans deserted their 
trades, peasant proprietors left their overtaxed holdings to become hired 
men, many villages and some towns (e.g., Tiberias in Palestine) were aban- 
doned because of high assessments; at last, in the fourth century, thousands 
of citizens fled over the border to seek refuge among the barbarians.®® 

It was probably to check this costly mobility, to ensure a proper flow 
of food to armies and cities, and of taxes to the state, that Diocletian resorted 
to measures that in effect established serfdom in fields, factories, and guilds. 
Having made the landowner responsible, through tax quotas in kind, for the 
productivity of his tenants, the government ruled that a tenant must remain 
on his land till his arrears of debt or tithes should be paid. We do not know 
the date of this historic decree; but in 332 a law of Constantine assumed 
and confirmed it, and made the tenant adscriptitiiis, “bound in writing” to 
the soil he tilled; he could not leave it without the consent of the owner; and 
when it was sold, he and his household were sold with it.®° He made no 
protest that has come down to us; perhaps the law was presented to him 
as a guarantee of security, as in Germany today. In this and other ways 
agriculture passed in the third century from slavery through freedom to 
serfdom, and entered the Middle Ages. 

Similar means of compelling stability were used in industry. Labor was 
“frozen” to its job, forbidden to pass from one shop to another without 
governmental consent. Each collegium or guild was bound to its trade and 
its assigned task, and no man might leave the guild in which he had been 
enrolled.*^ Membership in one guild or another was made compulsory on 
all persons engaged in commerce and industry; and the son was required to 
follow the trade of his father.®® When any man wished to leave his place 
or occupation for another, the state reminded him that Italy was in a state 
of siege by the barbarians, and that every man must stay at his post. 

In the year 305, in impressive ceremonies at Nicomedia and Milan, Dio- 
cletian and Maximian abdicated their power, and Galerius and Constantins 
Chlorus became Augusti, emperors respectively of the East and the West. 
Diocletian, still but fifty-five years of age, lost himself in his immense palace 
at Spalato, spent there the remaining eight years of his life, and saw without 
interference the breakdown of his tetrarchy in civil war. When Maximian 
urged him to return to power and end the strife, he replied that if iVlaximian 
could see the excellent cabbages he was growing in his garden he would not 
ask him to sacrifice such content for the pursuit and cares of power.®® 

He deserved his cabbages and his rest. He had ended a half century of 
anarchy, had re-established government and law, had restored stability to 
industry and security to trade, had tamed Persia and stilled the barbarians, 



CHAP.XXIX) THE COLLAPSE OF THE EMPIRE 645 

and, despite a few murders, had been, all in all, a sincere legislator and a just 
judge. It is true that he had established an expensive bureaucracy, had ended 
local autonomy, had punished opposition harshly, had persecuted the church 
that might have been a helpful ally in his healing work, and had turned the 
population of the Empire into a caste society with an unlettered peasantry 
at one end and an absolute monarch at the other. But the conditions that 
Rome faced would not permit liberal policies; Marcus Aurehus and Alexan- 
der Severus had tried these and failed. Confronted by enemies on every 
side, the Roman state did what all nations must do in crucial wars; it accepted 
the dictatorship of a strong leader, taxed itself beyond tolerance, and put 
individual liberty aside until collective liberty was secured. Diocletian had, 
with more cost but under harder circumstances, repeated the achievement 
of Augustus. His contemporaries and his posterity, mindful of what they 
had escaped, called him the “Father of the Golden Age.” Constantine entered 
the house that Diocletian built. 



CHAPTER XXX 


The Triumph of Christianity 

A.D. 306-325 


I. THE WAR OF CHURCH AND STATE 
A.D. 64-3 I I 

I N pre-Christian days the Roman government had for the most part 
allowed to the rivals of orthodox paganism a tolerance which they in 
turn had shown to the official and imperial cults; nothing was demanded 
from the adherents of new faiths except an occasional gesture of adoration 
to the gods and head of the state. The emperors were piqued to find that of 
all the heretics under their rule only the Christians and the Jews refused to 
join in honoring their genius. The burning of incense before a statue of 
the emperor had become a sign and affirmation of loyalty to the Empire, 
like the oath of allegiance required for citizenship today. On its side the 
Church resented the Roman idea that religion was subordinate to the state; 
it saw in emperor-worship an act of polytheism and idolatry, and instructed 
its followers to refuse it at any cost. The Roman government concluded 
that Christianity was a radical— perhaps a communist— movement, subtly 
designed to overthrow the established order. 

Before Nero the nvo forces had found it possible to live together without 
blows. The law had exempted the Jews from emperor-worship, and the 
Christians, at first confused with the Jews, were granted the same privilege. 
But the execution of Peter and Paul, and the burning of Christians to light 
up Nero’s games, turned this mutual and contemptuous tolerance into un- 
ceasing hostility and intermittent war. We cannot wonder that after such 
provocation the Christians turned their full armory against Rome— de- 
nounced its immorality and idolatry, ridiculed its gods, rejoiced in its calami- 
ties,^ and predicted its early fall. In the ardor of a faith made intolerant by 
intolerance, Christians declared that all who had had a chance to accept 
Christ and had refused would be condemned to eternal torments; many 
of them foretold the same fate for all the pre-Christian or non-Christian 
world; some excepted Socrates. In reply, pagans called the Christians “dregs 

646 



CHAP. XXX) THE TRIUMPH OF CHRISTIANITY 647 

of the people” and “insolent barbarians,” accused them of “hatred of the 
human race,” and ascribed the misfortunes of the Empire to the anger of 
pagan deities whose Christian revilers had been allowed to live.” A thousand 
slanderous legends arose on either side. Christians were charged with de- 
monic magic, secret immorahty, drinking human blood at the Paschal feast,® 
and worshiping an ass. 

But the conflict was profounder than mere pugnacity. Pagan civilization 
was founded upon the state, Christian civilization upon religion. To a Roman 
his religion was part of the structure and ceremony of government, and his 
morality culminated in patriotism; to a Christian his religion was something 
apart from and superior to poUtical society; his highest allegiance belonged 
not to Caesar but to Christ. Tertullian laid down the revolutionary principle 
that no man need obey a law that he deemed unjust.^ The Christian revered 
his bishop, even his priest, far above the Roman magistrate; he submitted 
his legal troubles with fellow Christians to his church authorities rather than 
to the officials of the state.® The detachment of the Christian from earthly 
affairs seemed to the pagan a flight from civic duty, a weakening of the 
national fiber and will. Tertullian advised Christians to refuse military serv- 
ice; and that a substantial number of them followed his counsel is indicated 
by Celsus’ appeal to end this refusal, and Origen’s reply that though Chris- 
tians will not fight for the Empire they will pray for it.® Christians were 
exhorted by their leaders to avoid non-Christians, to shun their festival games 
as barbarous, and their theaters as stews of obscenity.'^ Marriage with a non- 
Christian was forbidden. Christian slaves were accused of introducing dis- 
cord into the family by converting their masters’ children or wives; Chris- 
tianity was charged with breaking up the home.® 

The opposition to the new religion came rather from the people than 
from the state. The magistrates were often men of culture and tolerance; 
but the mass of the pagan population resented the aloofness, superiority, 
and certainty of the Christians, and called upon the authorities to punish 
these “atheists” for insulting the gods. Tertullian notes “the general hatred 
felt for us.” ® From the time of Nero Roman law seems to have branded the 
profession of Christianity as a capital offense; but under most of the 
emperors this ordinance was enforced with dehberate negligence.^^ If ac- 
cused, a Christian could usually free himself by offering incense to a statue of 
the emperor; thereafter he was apparently allowed to resume the quiet prac- 
tice of his faith.^ Christians who refused this obeisance might be imprisoned, 
or flogged, or exiled, or condemned to the mines, or, rarely, put to death. 
Domitian seems to have banished some Christians from Rome; but “being 
in some degree human,” says Tertullian, “he soon stopped what he had 



648 CAESAR AND CHRIST (CHAP. XXX 

begun, and restored the exiles.” Pliny enforced the law with the officious- 
ness of an amateur ( 1 1 1 ), if we may judge from his letter to Trajan: 

The method I have observed toward those who have been de- 
nounced to me as Christians is this: I interrogated them whether they 
were Christians; if they confessed it I repeated the question twice 
again, adding the threat of capital punishment; if they still persevered, 

I ordered them to be executed. . . . The temples, which had been 
almost deserted, begin now to be frequented . . . and there is a gen- 
eral demand for sacrificial animals, which for some time past have met 
with but few purchasers. 

To which Trajan repUed: 

The method you have pursued, my dear Pliny, in sifting the cases 
of those denounced to you as Christians is eminently proper. ... No 
search should be made for these people; when they are denounced and 
found guilty they must be punished; but where the accused party 
denies that he is a Christian, and gives proof ... by adoring our 
gods, he shall be pardoned. . . . Information without the accuser’s 
name subscribed must not be admitted in evidence against anyone.^^ 

The passage here italicized suggests that Trajan only reluctantly carried 
out a pre-existing statute. Nevertheless, we hear of two prominent martyrs 
in his principate: Simeon, head of the church of Jerusalem, and Ignatius, 
Bishop of Antioch; presumably there were others of less fame. 

Hadrian, a skeptic open to all ideas, instructed his appointees to give the 
Christians the benefit of every doubt.^® Being more religious, Antoninus 
allowed more persecution. At Smyrna the populace demanded of the 
“Asiarch” Philip that he enforce the law; he complied by having eleven 
Christians executed in the amphitheater (155). The bloodthirst of the crowd 
was aroused rather than assuaged; it clamored for the death of Bishop Poly- 
carp, a saintly patriarch of eighty-six years, who was said in his youth to 
have known Saint John. Roman soldiers found the old man in a suburban 
retreat, and brought him unresisting before the Asiarch at the games. Philip 
pressed him: “Take the oath, revile Christ, and I will let you go.” Polycarp, 
says the most ancient of the Acts of the Martyrs, replied: “For eighty-six 
years have I been his servant, and he has done me no wrong; how then can 
I blaspheme my King who saved me?” The crowd cried out that he should 
be burned alive. The flames, says the pious document, refused to bum him, 
“but he was within them as bread that is being baked; and we perceived 
such a fragrant smell as might come from incense or other costly spices. At 
length the lawless men commanded an executioner to stab him. When he 



CHAP.XXX) THE TRIUMPH OF CHRISTIANITY 649 

did this there came out a dove, and so much blood that the fire was quenched, 
and all the crowd marveled.” 

The persecutions were renewed under the saintly Aurelius. When famine, 
flood, pestilence, and war overwhelmed a once happy reign, the conviction 
spread that these evils were due to neglect and denial of the Roman gods. 
Aurelius shared the public terror, or yielded to it. In 177 he issued a rescript 
ordering the punishment of sects that caused disturbances by “exciting the 
ill-balanced minds of men” with new winds of doctrine. In that same year, 
at Vienne and Lyons, the pagan populace arose in fury against the Christians, 
and stoned them whenever they dared to stir from their homes. The im- 
perial legate ordered the arrest of the leading Christians of Lyons. Bishop 
Pothinus, ninety years old, died in jail from the effects of torture. A mes- 
senger was sent to Rome to ask the advice of the Emperor as to the treatment 
of the remaining prisoners. Marcus replied that those who denied Chris- 
tianity should be freed, but those who professed it should be put to death 
according to the law. 

The annual festival of the Augustalia was now to be celebrated in Lyons, 
and delegates from all Gaul crowded the provincial capital. At the height 
of the games the accused Christians were brought to the amphitheater and 
were questioned. Those who recanted were dismissed; forty-seven who 
persisted were put to death with a variety and barbarity of tortures equaled 
only by the Inquisition. Attains, second to Pothinus in the Christian com- 
munity, was forced to sit on a chair of red-hot iron and roast to death.^^ 
Blandina, a slave girl, was tortured all day, then bound up in a bag, and 
thrown into the arena to be gored to death by a bull. Her silent fortitude 
led many Christians to believe that Christ made his martyrs insensitive to 
pain; the same result might have come from ecstasy and fear. “The Chris- 
tian,” said Tertullian, “even when condemned to die, gives thanks.” * 

Under Commodus the persecutions waned. Septimius Severus renewed 
them, even to the point of making baptism a crime. In 203 many Christians 
suffered martyrdom in Carthage. One of them, a young mother named 
Perpetua, left a touching account of her days in prison, and her father’s 
prostrate pleas that she should renounce Christianity. She and another 
young mother were tossed and gored by a bull; we have an indication of the 
anesthetic effect of fear and trance in her later query, “When are we to be 
tossed?” Story tells how she guided to her throat the dagger of the reluctant 
gladiator who had to kill her.^® The Syrian empresses who followed Sep- 
timius had little concern for the Roman gods, and gave Christianity a careless 

* Our knowledge of the Lyons persecutions comes from a letter of “the servants of Christ 
at Lugdunum and Vienna in Gaul, to the brethren in Asia and Phrygia,” preserved in Eusebius, 
Ecclesiastical History, v, i. Some exaggeration may have crept into the report. 



650 CAESAR AND CHRIST (CHAP. XXX 

toleration. Under Alexander Severus peace seemed established among all 
the rival faiths. 

The renewal of the barbarian attacks ended this truce. To understand the 
persecution under Decius (or Aurelius) we must imagine a nation in the 
full excitement of war, frightened by serious defeats, and expecting hostile 
invasion. In 249 a wave of religious emotion swept the Empire; men and 
women flocked to the temples and besieged the gods with prayers. Amid 
this fever of patriotism and fear the Christians stood apart, still resenting 
and discouraging military service,^ scorning the gods, and interpreting the 
collapse of the Empire as the prophesied prelude to the destruction of 
“Babylon” and the return of Christ. Using the mood of the people as an 
opportunity to strengthen national enthusiasm and unity, Decius issued an 
edict requiring every inhabitant of the realm to offer a propitiatory act of 
homage to the gods of Rome. Apparently Christians were not asked to 
abjure their own faith, but were commanded to join in the universal 
supplicatio to the deities who, the populace believed, had so often saved 
imperiled Rome. Most Christians complied; in Alexandria, according to 
its Bishop Dionysius, “the apostasy was universal”; it was hkewise in 
Carthage and Smyrna; probably these Christians considered the supplicatio 
a patriotic formality. But the bishops of Jerusalem and Antioch died in jail, 
and the bishops of Rome and Toulouse were put to death (250). Hundreds 
of Roman Christians were crowded into dungeons; some were beheaded, 
some were burned at the stake, a few were given to the beasts in hohday 
festival. After a year the persecution abated; and by Easter of 251 it was 
practically at an end. 

Six years later Valerian, in another crisis of invasion and terror, ordered 
that “all persons must conform to the Roman ceremonials,” and forbade any 
Christian assemblage. Pope Sixtus II resisted, and was put to death with four 
of his deacons. Bishop Cyprian of Carthage was beheaded, the bishop of 
Tarragona was burned ahve. In 261, after the Persians had removed Valerian 
from the scene, Gallienus published the first edict of toleration, recognizing 
Christianity as a permitted religion, and ordering that property taken from 
Christians should be restored to them. Minor persecutions occurred in the 
next forty years, but for the most part these were for Christianity decades 
of unprecedented calm and rapid growth. In the chaos and terror of the third 
century men fled from the weakened state to the consolations of religion, 
and found them more abundantly in Christianity than in its rivals. The 
Church made rich converts now, built costly cathedrals, and allowed its 
adherents to share in the joys of this world. The odium theologicum sub- 
sided among the people; Christians intermingled more freely with pagans. 



CHAP.XXX) THE TRIUMPH OF CHRISTIANITY 651 

even married them. The Oriental monarchy of Diocletian seemed destined 
to consohdate religious as well as jxilitical security and peace. 

Galerius, however, saw in Christianity the last obstacle to absolute rule, 
and urged his chief to complete the Roman restoration by restoring the 
Roman gods. Diocletian hesitated; he was averse to needless risks, and esti- 
mated more truly than Galerius the magnitude of the task. But one day, at 
an imperial sacrifice, the Christians made the sign of the cross to ward off 
evil demons. When the augurs failed to find on the livers of the sacrificed 
animals the marks that they had hoped to interpret, they blamed the presence 
of profane and unbelieving persons. Diocletian ordered that all in attendance 
should offer sacrifice to the gods or be flogged, and that all soldiers in the 
army should similarly conform or be dismissed (302). Strange to say, 
Christian writers agreed with the pagan priests: the prayers of the Chris- 
tian, said Lactantius,^^ kept the Roman gods at a distance; and Bishop Dio- 
nysius had written to the same effect a generation before. Galerius at every 
opportunity argued the need of religious unity as a support to the new 
monarchy; and at last Diocletian yielded. In February, 303, the four rulers 
decreed the destruction of all Christian churches, the burning of Christian 
books, the dissolution of Christian congregations, the confiscation of their 
property, the exclusion of Christians from public office, and the punishment 
of death for Christians detected in religious assembly. A band of soldiers 
inaugurated the persecution by burning to the ground the cathedral at Nico- 
media. 

The Christians were now numerous enough to retaliate. A revolutionary 
movement broke out in Syria, and in Nicomedia incendiaries twice set fire 
to Diocletian’s palace. Galerius accused the Christians of the arson; they 
accused him; hundreds of Christians were arrested and tortured, but the 
guilt was never fixed. In September Diocletian ordered that imprisoned 
Christians who would worship the Roman gods should be freed, but that 
those who refused should be subjected to every torture known to Rome. 
Infuriated by scornful resistance, he directed all provincial magistrates to 
seek out every Christian, and use any method to compel him to appease the 
gods. Then, probably glad to leave this miserable enterprise to his suc- 
cessors, he resigned. 

Maximian carried out the edict with military thoroughness in Italy. 
Galerius, become Augustus, gave every encouragement to the persecution 
in the East. The roll of martyrs was increased in every part of the Empire 
except Gaul and Britain, where Constantins contented himself with burning 
a few churches. Eusebius assures us, presumably with the hyperbole of 
indignation, that men were flogged till the flesh hung from their bones, or 
their flesh was scraped to the bone with shells; salt or vinegar was poured 



652 CAESAR AND CHRIST (CHAP. XXX 

upon the wounds; the flesh was cut off bit by bit and fed to waiting animals; 
or bound to crosses, men were eaten piecemeal by starved beasts. Some 
victims had their Angers pierced with sharp reeds under the nails; some had 
their eyes gouged out; some were suspended by a hand or a foot; some had 
molten lead poured down their throats; some were beheaded, or crucified, 
or beaten to death with clubs; some were tom apart by being tied to the 
momentarily bent branches of trees."® We have no pagan narrative of these 
events. 

The persecution continued for eight years, and brought death to ap- 
•proximately 1500 Christians, orthodox or heretic, and diverse sufferings to 
countless more. Thousands of Christians recanted; tradition said that even 
Marcellinus, Bishop of Rome, denied his faith under duress of terror and 
pain. But most of the persecuted stood firm; and the sight or report of 
heroic fidelity under torture strengthened the faith of the wavering and 
won new members for the hunted congregations. As the bratalities multi- 
phed, the sympathy of the pagan population was stirred; the opinion of gopd 
citizens found courage to express itself against the most ferocious oppres- 
sion in Roman history. Once the people had urged the state to destroy 
Christianity; now the people stood aloof from the government, and many 
pagans risked death to hide or protect Christians until the storm should 
pass.^^ In 3 1 1 Galerius, suffering from a mortal illness, convinced of failure, 
and implored by his wife to make his peace with the undefeated God of the 
Christians, promulgated an edict of toleration, recognizing Christianity as 
a lawful religion and asldng the prayers of the Christians in return for “our 
most gentle clemency.” 

The Diocletian persecution was the greatest test and triumph of the 
Church. It weakened Christianity for a time through the natural defection 
of adherents who had joined it, or grown up, during a half century of 
unmolested prosperity. But soon the defaulters were doing penance and 
pleading for readmission to the fold. Accounts of the loyalty of martyrs who 
had died, or of “confessors” who had suffered, for the faith were circulated 
from community to community; and these Acta Martyrum, intense with 
exaggeration and fascinating with legend, played a historic role in awaken- 
ing or confirming Christian belief. “The blood of martyrs,” said Tertullian, 
“is seed.” There is no greater drama in human record than the sight of a 
few Christians, scorned or oppressed by a succession of emperors, bearing 
all trials with a fierce tenacity, multiplying quietly, building order while 
their enemies generated chaos, fighting the sword with the word, brutality 
with hope, and at last defeating the strongest state that history has known. 
Caesar and Christ had met in the arena, and Christ had won. 



CHAP.XXX) THE TRIUMPH OF CHRISTIANITY 


653 


II. THE RISE OF CONSTANTINE 

Diocletian, peaceful in his Dalmatian palace, saw the failure of both the 
persecution and the tetrarchy. Seldom had the Empire witnessed such con- 
fusion as followed his abdication. Galerius prevailed upon Constantins to 
let him appoint Severus and Maximinus Daza as “Caesars” (305). At once 
the principle of heredity asserted its claims: Maxentius, son of Maximian, 
wished to succeed his father’s authority, and a like resolution fired Con- 
stantine. 

Flavius Valerius Constantinus had begun life at Naissus in Moesia (272?) 
as the illegitimate son of Constantius by his legal concubine Helena, a bar- 
maid from Bithynia.^'’’ On becoming a “Caesar,” Constantius was required 
by Diocletian to put away Helena and to take Maximian’s stepdaughter 
Theodora as his wife. Constantine received only a meager education. He 
took up soldiering early, and proved his valor in the wars against Egypt 
and Persia. Galerius, on succeeding Diocletian, kept the young officer near 
him as a hostage for the good behavior of Constantius. When the latter 
asked Galerius to send the youth to him Galerius procrastinated craftily j 
but Constantine escaped from his watchers, and rode night and day across 
Europe to join his father at Boulogne and share in a British campaign. The 
Gallic army, deeply loyal to the humane Constantius, came to love his 
handsome, brave, and energetic son; and when the father died at York 
(306), the troops acclaimed Constantine not merely as “Caesar” but as 
Augustus— tmT^tvor. He accepted the lesser title, excusing himself on the 
ground that his life would be unsafe without an army at his back. Galerius, 
too distant to intervene, reluctantly recognized him as a “Caesar.” Con- 
stantine fought successfully against the invading Franks, and fed the beasts 
of the Gallic amphitheaters with barbarian kings. 

Meanwhile in Rome the Praetorian Guard, eager to restore the ancient 
capital to leadership, hailed Maxentius as emperor (306). Severus descended 
from Milan to attack him; Maximian, to confound the confusion, returned 
to the purple at his son’s request, and joined in the campaign; Severus was 
deserted by his troops and put to death (307). To help himself face the 
growing chaos, the aging Galerius appointed a new Augustus— Y\2iv'ms Li- 
cinius; hearing which, Constantine assumed a like dignity (307). A year 
later Maximinus Daza adopted the same title, so that in place of the two 
Augusti of Diocletian’s plan there were now six; no one cared to be merely 
“Caesar.” Maxentius quarreled with his father; Maximian went to Gaul to 
seek Constantine’s aid; while the latter fought Germans on the Rhine, 
Maximian tried to replace him as commander of the Gallic armies; Con- 



654 CAESAR AND CHRIST ( CHAP. XXX 

stantine marched across Gaul, besieged the usurper in Marseilles, captured 
him, and granted him the courtesy of suicide (310). 

The death of Galerius ( 3 1 1 ) removed the last barrier between intrigue 
and war. Maximinus plotted with Maxentius to overthrow Licinius and 
Constantine, who conspired to overthrow them. Taking the initiative, Con- 
stantine crossed the Alps, defeated an army near Turin, and advanced upon 
Rome with a celerity of movement, and a restraining disciphne of his troops, 
that recalled the march of Caesar from the Rubicon. On October 27, 312, 
he met the forces of Maxentius at Saxa Rubra (Red Rocks) nine miles north 
of Rome; and by superior strategy compelled Maxentius to fight with his 
back to the Tiber, and no retreat possible except over the Mulvian Bridge. On 
the afternoon before the battle, says Eusebius,^® Constantine saw a flaming 
cross in the sky, with the Greek words en toutoi 7 nka—‘'m this sign con- 
quer.” * Early the next morning, according to Eusebius and Lactantius,®^ 
Constantine dreamed that a voice commanded him to have his soldiers mark 
upon their shields the letter X with a line drawn through it and curled around 
the top— the symbol of Christ. On arising he obeyed, and then advanced 
into the forefront of battle behind a standard (known henceforth as the 
labarum) carrying the initials of Christ interwoven with a cross. As Max- 
entius displayed the Mithraic-Aurelian banner of the Unconquerable Sun, 
Constantine cast in his lot with the Christians, who were numerous in his 
army, and made the engagement a turning point in the history of religion. 
To the worshipers of Mithras in Constantine’s forces the cross could give 
no offense, for they had long fought under a standard bearing a Alithraic 
cross of light.^ In any case Constantine won the battle of the Af ulvian Bridge, 
and Alaxentius perished in the Tiber with thousands of his troops. The 
victor entered Rome the welcomed and undisputed master of the West. 

Early in 313 Constantine and Licinius met at Alilan to co-ordinate their 
rule. To consolidate Christian support in all provinces, Constantine and 
Licinius issued an “Edict of Alilan,” confirming the reli.mous toleration 
proclaimed by Galerius, extending it to all religions, and ordering the restora- 
tion of Christian properties seized during the recent persecutions. After 
this historic declaration, which in effect conceded the defeat of paganism, 
Constantine returned to the defense of Gaul, and Licinius moved eastward 
to overwhelm Maximinus (3 13). The death of Ala.ximinus shortly afterward 
left Constantine and Licinius the unchallenged rulers of the Empire. Licinius 

• Usually handed down by tradition in a Latin form: in hoc vince, or in hoc signo vinces— 
“in this sign thou shak conquer.” Eusebius, our sole authority for this vision, is confessedly 
prone to edification; “but seeing,” he pleads, “that the Emperor did with an oath confirm it to 
be true when he related it to me who intended to write his history . . . who can doubt his 
relation?” so 



CHAP.XXX) the triumph OF CHRISTIANITY 655 

married Constantine’s sister, and a war-weary people rejoiced at the prospect 
of peace. 

But neither of the Augnsti had quite abandoned the hope of undivided 
supremacy. In 314 their mounting enmity reached the point of war. Con- 
stantine invaded Pannonia, defeated Licinius, and exacted the surrender of 
all Roman Europe except Thrace. Licinius revenged himself upon Con- 
stantine’s Christian supporters by renewing the persecution in Asia and 
Egypt. He excluded Christians from his palace at Nicomedia, required every 
soldier to adore the pagan gods, forbade the simultaneous attendance of 
both sexes at Christian worship, and at last prohibited all Christian services 
within city walls. Disobedient Christians lost their positions, their citizen- 
ship, their property, their liberty, or their lives. 

Constantine watched for an opportunity not only to succor the Christians 
of the East, but to add the East to his realm. When barbarians invaded 
Thrace, and Licinius failed to move against them, Constantine led his army 
from Thessalonica to the rescue of Licinius’ province. After the barbarians 
were driven back Licinius protested Constantine’s entry into Thrace; and 
as neither ruler desired peace, war was renewed. The defender of Chris- 
tianity, with 130,000 men, met the defender of paganism, with 160,000 
men, first at Adrianople and then at Chrysopolis (Scutari) , won, and became 
sole emperor (323). Licinius surrendered on a promise of pardon; but in 
the following year he was executed on the charge that he had resumed his 
intrigues. Constantine recalled the Christian exiles, and restored to all “con- 
fessors” their lost privileges and property. While still proclaiming liberty 
of worship for all, he now definitely declared himself a Christian, and invited 
his subjects to join him in embracing the new faith. 


III. CONSTANTINE AND CHRISTIANITY 

Was his conversation sincere— was it an act of religious belief, or a con- 
summate stroke of political wisdom? Probably the latter.^® His mother 
Helena had turned to Christianity when Constantius divorced her; presum- 
ably she had acquainted her son with the excellences of the Christian way; 
and doubtless he had been impressed by the invariable victory that had 
crowned his arms under the banner and cross of Christ. But only a skeptic 
would have made so subtle a use of the religious feelings of humanity. The 
Historia Augusta quotes him as saying, “it is Fortuna that makes a man 
emperor” though this was a bow to modesty rather than to chance. In 
his Gallic court he had surrounded himself with pagan scholars and philos- 
ophers.®® After his conversion he seldom conformed to the ceremonial re- 



CAESAR AND CHRIST 


656 


(chap. XXX 


quirements of Christian worship. His letters to Christian bishops make it 
clear that he cared little for the theological differences that agitated Chris- 
tendom— though he was willing to suppress dissent in the interests of im- 
perial unity. Throughout his reign he treated the bishops as his political 
aides; he summoned them, presided over their councils, and agreed to enforce 
whatever opinion their majority should formulate. A real behever would 
have been a Christian first and a statesman afterward; with Constantine it 
was the reverse. Christianity was to him a means, not an end. 

He had seen in his lifetime the failure of three persecutions; and it was 
not lost upon him that Christianity had grown despite them. Its adherents 
were still very much in the minority; but they were relatively united, brave, 
and strong, while the pagan majority was divided among many creeds, and 
included a dead weight of simple souls Avithout conviction or influence. 
Christians were especially numerous in Rome under Maxentius, and in the 
East under Licinius; Constantine’s support of Christianity was worth a dozen 
legions to him in his wars against these men. He was impressed by the com- 
parative order and morality of Christian conduct, the bloodless beauty of 
Christian ritual, the obedience of Christians to their clergy, their humble 
acceptance of life’s inequahties in the hope of happiness beyond the grave; 
perhaps this new rehgion would purify Roman morals, regenerate marriage 
and the family, and allay the fever of class war. The Christians, despite bitter 
oppression, had rarely revolted against the state; their teachers had incul- 
cated submission to the civil powers, and had taught the divine right of 
kings. Constantine aspired to an absolute monarchy; such a government 
would profit from religious support; the hierarchical discipline and ecu- 
menical authority of the Church seemed to offer a spiritual correlate for 
monarchy. Perhaps that marvelous organization of bishops and priests could 
become an instrument of pacification, unification, and nile.^ 

Nevertheless, in a world still preponderantly pagan, Constantine had to 
feel his way by cautious steps. He continued to use vague monotheistic lan- 
guage that any pagan could accept. During the earlier years of his supremacy 
he carried out patiently the ceremonial required of him as pontifex mcmmiis 
of the traditional cult; he restored pagan temples, and ordered the taking 
of the auspices. He used pagan as well as Christian rites in dedicating Con- 
stantinople. He used pagan magic formulas to protect crops and heal 
disease.®® 

Gradually, as his power grew more secure, he favored Christianity more 
openly. After 317 his coins dropped one by one their pagan effigies, until 
by 323 they bore only neutral inscriptions. A legal text of his reign, ques- 
tioned but not disproved, gave Christian bishops the authority of judges in 
their dioceses; ®^ other laws exempted Church realty from taxation,®* made 



CHAP.XXX) THE TRIUMPH OF CHRISTIANITY 657 

Christian associations juridical persons, allowed them to own land and re- 
ceive bequests, and assigned the property of intestate martyrs to the 
Church.®® Constantine gave money to needy congregations, built several 
churches in Constantinople and elsewhere, and forbade the worship of images 
in the new capital. Forgetting the Edict of Milan, he prohibited the meet- 
ings of heretical sects, and finally ordered the destruction of their con- 
venticles.^® He gave his sons an orthodox Christian education, and financed 
his mother’s Christian philanthropies. The Church rejoiced in blessings be- 
yond any expectation. Eusebius broke out into orations that were songs of 
gratitude and praise; and all over the Empire Christians gathered in festal 
thanksgiving for the triumph of their God. 

Three clouds softened the brilliance of this “cloudless day”: the monastic 
secession, the Donatist schism, the Arian heresy. In the interval between 
the Decian and the Diocletian persecution the Church had become the 
richest religious organization in the Empire, and had moderated its attacks 
upon wealth. Cyprian complained that his parishioners were mad about 
money, that Christian women painted their faces, that bishops held lucrative 
offices of state, made fortunes, lent money at usurious interest, and denied 
their faith at the first sign of danger.^^ Eusebius mourned that priests quar- 
reled violently in their competition for ecclesiastical preferment.*® V^ile 
Christianity converted the world, the world converted Christianity, and 
displayed the natural paganism of mankind. Christian monasticism arose as 
a protest against this mutual adjustment of the spirit and the flesh. A minority 
wished to avoid any indulgence of human appetite, and to continue the early 
Christian absorption in thoughts of etemd life. Following the custom of 
the Cynics, some of these ascetics renounced all possessions, donned the 
ragged robe of the philosopher, and subsisted on alms. A few, hke Paul the 
Hermit, went to live as sohtaries in the Egyptian desert. About 275 an 
Egyptian monk, Anthony, began a quarter century of isolated existence 
first in a tomb, then in an abandoned mountain castle, then in a rock-hewn 
desert cell. There he struggled nightly with frightful visions and pleasant 
dreams, and overcame them all; until at last his reputation for sanctity filled 
all Christendom, and peopled the desert with emulating eremites. In 325 
Pachomius, feehng that solitude was selfishness, gathered anchorites into 
an abbey at Tabenne in Egypt, and founded that cenobitic, or community, 
monasticism which was to have its most influential development in the West. 
The Church opposed the monastic movement for a time, and then accepted 
it as a necessary balance to its increasing preoccupation with government. 

Within a year after Constantine’s conversion the Church was tom by a schism 
that might have ruined it in the very hour of victory. Donatus, Bishop of 



658 CAESAR AND CHRIST (CHAP. XXX 

Carthage, supported by a priest of like name and temper, insisted that Christian 
bishops who had surrendered the Scriptures to the pagan police during the per- 
secutions had forfeited their office and powers; that baptisms or ordinations 
performed by such bishops were null and void; and that the validity of sacra- 
ments depended in part upon the spiritual state of the ministrant. When the 
Church refused to adopt this stringent creed, the Donatists set up rival bishops 
wherever the existing prelate failed to meet their tests. Constantine, who had 
thought of Christianity as a unifying force, was dismayed by the chaos and 
violence that ensued, and was presumably not unmoved by the occasional alliance 
of Donatists with radical movements among the African peasantry. He called a 
council of bishops at Arles (314), confirmed its denunciation of the Donatists, 
ordered the schismatics to return to the Church, and decreed that recalcitrant 
congregations should lose their property and their civil rights (316). Five years 
later, in a momentary reminiscence of the Milan edict, he withdrew these 
measures, and gave the Donatists a scornful toleration. The schism continued 
rill the Saracens overwhelmed orthodox and heretic alike in the conquest of 
Africa. 

In those same years Alexandria saw the rise of the most challenging heresy 
in the history of the Church. About 318 a priest from the Egyptian town of 
Baucalis staried his bishop with strange opinions about the nature of Christ. 
A learned Catholic historian describes him generously: 

Arius . . . was tall and thin, of melancholy look, and an aspect that 
showed traces of his austerities. He was known to be an ascetic, as 
could be seen from his costume— a short tunic without sleeves, under 
a scarf that served as a cloak. His manner of speaking was gentle; his 
addresses were persuasive. The consecrated virgins, who were nu- 
merous in Alexandria, held him in great esteem; and he counted many 
stanch supporters among the higher clergy 

Christ, said Arius, was not one with the Creator, he was rather the Logos, 
the first and highest of all created beings. Bishop Alexander protested, Arius 
persisted. If, he argued, the Son had been begotten of the Father, it must 
have been in time; the Son therefore could not be coetemal with the Father. 
Furthermore, if Christ was created, it must have been from nothing, not from 
the Father’s substance; Christ was not “consubstantial” with the Father.^^ 
The Holy Spirit was begotten by the Logos, and was still less God than the 
Logos. We see in these doctrines the continuity of ideas from Plato through 
the Stoics, Philo, Plotinus, and Origen to Arius; Platonism, which had so 
deeply influenced Christian theology, was now in conflict with the Church. 

Bishop Alexander was shocked not only by these views but by their rapid 
spread even among the clergy. He called a council of Egyptian bishops at 



CHAP.XXX) THE TRIUMPH OF CHRISTIANITY 659 

Alexandria, persuaded it to unfrock Arius and his followers, and sent an 
account of the proceedings to other bishops. Some of these objected; many 
priests sympathized with Ariusf throughout the Asiatic provinces clergy as 
well as laity divided on the issue, and made the cities ring with such “tumult 
and disorder . . , that the Christian religion,” says Eusebius, “afforded a 
subject of profane merriment to the pagans, even in their theaters.” Con- 
stantine, coming to Nicomedia after overthrowing Licinius, heard the story 
from its bishop. He sent both Alexander and Arius a personal appeal to imi- 
tate the calm of philosophers, to reconcile their differences peaceably, or 
at least to keep their debates from the public ear. The letter, preserved by 
Eusebius, clearly reveals Constantine’s lack of theology, and the political 
purpose of his rehgious policy. 

I had proposed to lead back to a single form the ideas which aU 
people conceive of the Deity; for I feel strongly that if I could induce 
men to unite on that subject, the conduct of public affairs would be 
considerably eased. But alas! I hear that there are more disputes among 
you than recendy in Africa. The cause seems to be quite trifling, and 
unworthy of such fierce contests. You, Alexander, wished to know 
what your priests were thinking on a point of law, even on a portion 
only of a question in itself entirely devoid of importance; and you, 
Arius, if you had such thoughts, should have kept silence. . . . There 
was no need to make these questions public . . . since they are prob- 
lems that idleness alone raises, and whose only use is to sharpen men’s 
wits . . . these are silly actions worthy of inexperienced children, and 
not of priests or reasonable man.^® 

The letter had no effect. To the Church the question of the “consubstan- 
tiahty” {homoousia) as against the mere similarity {ho?nowusia) of the Son 
and the Father was vital both theologically and politically. If Christ was 
not God, the whole structure of Christian doctrine would begin to crack; 
and if division were permitted on this question, chaos of belief might destroy 
the unity and authority of the Church, and therefore its value as an aide to 
the state. As the controversy spread, setting the Greek East aflame, Con- 
stantine resolved to end it by caUing the first ecumenical— universal— council 
of the Church. He summoned all bishops to meet in 325 at Bithynian Nicaea, 
near his capital Nicomedia, and provided funds for all their expenses. Not 
less than 318 bishops came, “attended” says one of them, “by a vast con- 
course of the lower clergy”: the statement reveals the immense growth 
of the Church. Most of the bishops were from the Eastern provinces; many 
W estem dioceses ignored the controversy; and Pope Silvester I, detained 
by lUness, was content to be represented by some priests. 



66o 


CAESAR AND CHRIST 


(chap. XXX 

The Council met in the hall of an imperial palace. Constantine presided 
and opened the proceedings by a brief appeal to the bishops to restore the 
unity of the Church. He “listened patiently to the debates,” reports Eusebius, 
“moderated the violence of the contending parties,” and himself joined 
in the argument. Arius reaffirmed his view that Christ was a created being, 
not equal to the Father, but “divine only by participation.” Clever ques- 
tioners forced him to admit that if Christ was a creature, and had had a 
beginning, he could change; and that if he could change he might pass from 
virtue to vice. The answers were logical, honest, and suicidal. Athanasius, 
the eloquent and pugnacious archdeacon whom Alexander had brought with 
him as a theological sword, made it clear that if Christ and the Holy Spirit 
were not of one substance with the Father, polytheism would triumph. He 
conceded the difficulty of picturing three distinct persons in one God, but 
argued that reason must bow to the mystery of the Trinity. All but seven- 
teen of the bishops agreed with him, and signed a statement expressing his 
view. The supporters of Arius agreed to sign if they might add one iota, 
changing homoousion to homoiousion. The Council refused, and issued with 
the Emperor’s approval the following creed: 

We believe in one God, the Father Almighty, maker of all things 
visible or invisible; and in one Lord Jesus Christ, the Son of God, be- 
gotten . . . not made, being of one essence {homoousion) with the 
Father . . . who for us men and our salvation came down and was 
made flesh, was made man, suffered, rose again the third day, ascended 
into heaven, and comes to judge the quick and the dead. . . .* ■** 

Only five bishops, finally only two, refused to sign this formula. These two, 
with the unrepentant Arius, were anathematized by the Council and exiled 
by the Emperor. An imperial edict ordered that all books by Arius should 
be burned, and made the concealment of such a book punishable with death.f 
Constantine celebrated the conclusion of the Council with a royal dinner 
to all the assembled bishops, and then dismissed them with the request that 
they should not tear one another to pieces.®^ He was mistaken in thinking 
that the controversy was ended, or that he himself woul^ not change his 
view of it, but he was right in believing that he had struck a great blow for 
the unity of the Church. The Council signalized the conviction of the eccle- 

• This differs from the “Nicene Creed” now in use, which is a revision made in 362. 

t The Council also decreed that all churches should celebrate Easter on the same day, to be 
named in each year by the Bishop of Alexandria according to an astronomical rule, and to be 
promulgated by the Bishop of Rome. On the question of clerical celibacy the Council inclined 
to require continence of married priests; but Paphnutius, Bishop of Upper Thebes, persuaded 
his peers to leave unchanged the prevailing custom, which forbade marriage after ordination, 
but permitted a priest to cohabit with a wife whom he had married before ordination.6<> 




CHAP.XXX) THE TRIUMPH OF CHRISTIANITY 66l 

siastical majority that the organization and survival of the Church required a 
certain fixity of doctrine; and in final effect it achieved that practical unanim- 
ity of basic belief which gave the medieval Church its Catholic name. At the 
same time it marked the replacement of paganism with Christianity as the 
rehgious expression and support of the Roman Empire, and committed Con- 
stantine to a more definite alHance with Christianity than ever before. A 
new civilization, based on a new religion, would now rise over the ruins of 
an exhausted culture and a dying creed. The Middle Ages had begun. 


rV. CONSTANTINE AND CIVILIZATION 

A year after the Council Constantine dedicated, amid the desolation of 
Byzantium, a new city which he termed Nova Roma, and which posterity 
called by his name. In 330 he turned his back upon both Rome and Nico- 
media, and made Constantinople his capital. There he surrounded himself 
with the impressive pomp of an Oriental court, feeling that its psychological 
influence upon army and people would make its expensive pageantry a subtle 
economy in government. He protected the army with able diplomacy and 
arms, tempered despotism with humane decrees, and lent his aid to letters 
and the arts. He encouraged the schools at Athens, and founded at Con- 
stantinople a new university where state-paid professors taught Greek and 
Latin, hterature and philosophy, rhetoric and law, and trained officials for 
the Empire.®^ He confirmed and extended the privileges of physicians and 
teachers in all provinces. Provincial governors were instructed to estabhsh 
schools of architecture, and to draw students to them with divets privi- 
leges and rewards. Artists were exempted from civic obhgations, so that they 
might have time to learn their art thoroughly and transmit it to their sons. The 
art treasures of the Empire were drawn upon to make Constantinople an 
elegant capital. 

In Rome the architectural works of this period were inaugurated by 
Maxentius. He began (306), and Constantine finished, an immense basilica 
that marked the climax of classical architecture in the West. Adapting the 
structure of the great baths, this edifice covered an area 330 by 250 feet. Its 
central hall, 1 14 by 82 feet, was roofed by three cross vaults of concrete 
1 20 feet high, partly supported by eight broad piers faced with fluted Co- 
rinthian columns sixty feet tall. Its pavement was of colored marble; its bays 
were peopled with statuary; and the walls of these bays were prolonged 
above their roofs to serve as elevated buttresses for the central vaults. Gothic 
and Renaissance architects found much instruction in these vaults and but- 
tresses. Bramante, designing St. Peter’s, planned to “raise the Pantheon over 



66z CAESAR AND CHRIST (CHAP. XXX 

the Basilica of Constantine” i.e., to crown a spacious nave with a massive 
dome. 

The first Christian emperor built many churches in Rome, probably including 
the original form of San Lorenzo outside the Walls. To celebrate his victory at 
the Mulvian Bridge he raised in 3 1 5 the arch that still towers over the Via dei 
Trionfi. It is one of the best preserved of Rome’s remains; and its majesty is not 
visibly injured by the diverse pilferage of its parts. Four finely proportioned 
shafts, rising from sculptured bases, divide the three arches, and support an ornate 
entablature. The attic story bears reliefs and statues taken from monuments of 
Trajan and Aurelius; while the medallions between the columns are from some 
building of Hadrian’s reign. Two of the reliefs appear to be the work of Con- 
stantine’s artists. The crude squat figures, the awkward quarrel of profile faces 
with frontal legs, the rude piling of heads upon heads as a substitute for perspec- 
tive, betray a coarsening of technique and taste; but the deep drilling produces, 
in the play of light and shade, an impressive effect of depth and space; and the 
episodes are presented with a rough vitality as if Italian art had resolved to 
retmn to its source. The colossal figure of Constantine in the Palazzo dei Con- 
servatori carries this primitiveness to a repellent extreme; it seems incredible that 
the man who presided so graciously over the Council of Nicaea should have 
resembled this dour barbarian— unless the artist had a mind to illustrate in advance 
the cynical summary of Gibbon: “I have described the triumph of barbarism 
and religion.” 

Early in this fourth century a new art took form-the “illumination” of manu- 
scripts with miniature paintings. Literature itself was now predominantly Chris- 
tian. Lucius Firmianus Lactantius expounded Christianity eloquently in Divinae 
Institutiones (307), and in De Monibtis fersecutontm (314) described the final 
agonies of the persecuting emperors with Ciceronian elegance and venom. “Re- 
ligion,” wrote Lactantius, “must by its very nature be untrammeled, unforced, 
free” a heresy which he did not live to expiate. More famous was Eusebius 
Pamphili, bishop of Caesarea. He began his literary career as a priestly scribe 
and librarian for his episcopal predecessor, Pamphilus, whom he loved so well 
that he adopted his name. Pamphilus ha*d acquired Origen’s library, and had built 
around it the largest Christian collection of books yet known. Living among 
these volumes, Eusebius became the most erudite cleric of his time. Pamphilus 
lost his life in the Galerian persecution (310), and Eusebius was much plagued 
by later queries as to how he himself had survived. He made diverse enemies 
by taking a middle position between Arius and Alexander; nevertheless, he 
became the Bossuet of Constantine’s court, and was commissioned to write the 
imperial biography. Part of his scholastic harvest was gathered into a Universal 
History— the most complete of ancient chronologies. Eusebius arranged sacred 
and profane history in parallel columns divided by a synchronizing row of dates, 
and tried to fix the time of every important event from Abraham to Constantine. 
All later chronologies rested on this “canon.” 



CHAP.XXX) THE TRIUMPH OF CHRISTIANITY 663 

Putting flesh upon these bones, Eusebius issued in 325 an Ecclesiastical History 
describing the development of the Church from its beginnings to the Council of 
Nicaea. Here in the first chapter, again serving as a model for Bossuet, was the 
earliest philosophy of history— portraying time as the battleground of God and 
Satan, and all events as advancing the triumph of Christ. The book was poorly 
arranged but well written. The sources were critically and conscientiously 
examined, the statements are as accurate as in any ancient work of history; 
and at every turn Eusebius put posterity in his debt by quoting important docu- 
ments that would otherwise have been lost. The bishop’s learning is enormous, 
his style is warmed with feeling and rises to eloquence in moments of theological 
odium. He frankly excludes such matters as might not edify his Christian readers 
or support his philosophy, and he manages to write a history of the great Council 
without mentioning either Arius or Athanasius. The same honest dishonesty 
makes his Life of Constantine a panegyric rather than a biography. It begins 
with eight inspiring chapters on the Emperor’s piety and good works, and tells 
how he “governed his empire in a godly manner for more than thirty years.” 
One would never guess from this book that Constantine had killed his son, his 
nephew, and his wife. 

For like Augustus, Constantine had managed well everything but his family. 
His relations with his mother were generally happy. Apparently by his commis- 
sion she went to Jerusalem, and leveled to the ground the scandalous Temple of 
Aphrodite that had been built, it was said, over the Saviour’s tomb. According 
to Eusebius the Holy Sepulcher thereupon came to light, with the very cross 
on which Christ had died. Constantine ordered a Church of the Holy Sepulcher 
to be built over the tomb, and the revered relics were preserved in a special 
shrine. As in classical days the pagan world had cherished and adored the relics 
of the Trojan War, and even Rome had boasted the Palladium of Troy’s Athene, 
so now the Christian world, changing its surface and renewing its essence in 
the immemorial manner of human life, began to collect and worship relics of 
Christ and the saints. Helena raised a chapel over the traditional site of Jesus’ 
birth at Bethlehem, modestly served the nuns who ministered there, and then 
returned to Constantinople to die in the arms of her son. 

Constantine had been twice married: first to Minervina, who had borne 
him a son Crispus; then to Maximian’s daughter Fausta, by whom he had 
three daughters and three sons. Crispus became an excellent soldier, and 
rendered vital aid to his father in the campaigns against Licinius. In 326 
Crispus was put to death by Constantine’s order; about the same time the 
Emperor decreed the execution of Licinianus, son of Licinius by Constan- 
tine’s sister Constantia; and shortly thereafter Fausta was slain by her hus- 
band’s command. We do not know the reasons for this triple execution. 
Zosimus assures us that Crispus had made love to Fausta, who accused him 
to the Emperor; and that Helena, who loved Crispus dearly, had avenged 



CAESAR AND CHRIST 


664 


(chap. XXX 


him by persuading Constantine that his wife had yielded to his son.®^ Possibly 
Fausta had schemed to remove Crispus from the path of her sons’ rise to 
imperial power, and Licinianus may have been lolled for plotting to claim 
his father’s share of the realm. 

F austa achieved her aim after her death, for in 3 3 5 Constantine bequeathed 
the Empire to his surviving sons and nephews. Two years later, at Easter, 
he celebrated with festival ceremonies the thirtieth year of his reign. Then, 
feehng the nearness of death, he went to take the warm baths at near-by 
Aquyrion. As his illness increased, he called for a priest to administer to him 
that sacrament of baptism which he had purposely deferred to this moment, 
hoping to be cleansed by it from all the sins of his crowded life. Then the 
tired ruler, aged sixty-four, laid aside the purple robes of royalty, put on 
the white garb of a Christian neophyte, and passed away. 

He was a masterly general, a remarkable administrator, a superlative states- 
man. He inherited and completed the restorative work of Diocletian; through 
them the Empire Hved 1150 years more. He continued the monarchical 
forms of Aurehan and Diocletian, partly out of ambition and vanity, partly, 
no doubt, because he beheved that absolute rule was demanded by the chaos 
of the times. His greatest error lay in dividing the Empire among his sons; 
presumably he foresaw that they would fight for sole supremacy as he had 
done, but surmised that they would fight even more certainly if he chose 
another heir; this, too, is a price of monarchy. His executions we cannot 
judge, not knowing their provocation; burdened with the problems of rule, 
he may have allowed fear and jealousy to dethrone his reason for a while; and 
there are signs that remorse weighed heavily upon his declining years. His 
Christianity, beginning as pohcy, appears to have graduated into sincere 
conviction. He became the most persistent preacher in his realm, persecuted 
heretics faithfully, and took God into partnership at every step. Wiser than 
Diocletian, he gave new life to an aging Empire by associating it with a young 
rehgion, a vigorous organization, a fresh morality. By his aid Christianity 
became a state as well as a church, and the mold, for fourteen centuries, of 
European hfe and thought. Perhaps, if we except Augustus, the grateful 
Church was right in naming him the greatest of the emperors. 



Epilogue 


I. WHY ROME FELL 

I AHE two greatest problems in history,” says a brilliant scholar of our 

JL time, are “how to account for the rise of Rome, and how to account 
for her fall.” ^ We may come nearer to understanding them if we remember 
that the fall of Rome, like her rise, had not one cause but many, and was 
not an event but a process spread over 300 years. Some nations have not 
lasted as long as Rome fell. 

A great civilization is not conquered from without until it has destroyed 
itself within. The essential causes of Rome’s decline lay in her people, her 
morals, her class struggle, her failing trade, her bureaucratic despotism, her 
stifling taxes, her consuming wars. Christian writers were keenly appreciative 
of this decay. TertulHan, about aoo, heralded with pleasure the ipsa clausula 
raeca/i— literally the fin de siecle or end of an era— as probably a prelude to 
the destruction of the pagan world. Cyprian, towards 250, answering the 
charge that Christians were the source of the Empire’s misfortunes, attributed 
these to natural causes: 

You must know that the world has grown old, and does not remain 
in its former vigor. It bears witness to its own decline. The rainfall and 
the sun’s warmth are both diminishing; the metals are nearly exhausted; 
the husbandman is failing in the fields.” 

Barbarian inroads, and centuries of mining the richer veins, had doubtless 
lowered Rome’s supply of the precious metals. In central and southern Italy 
deforestation, erosion, and the neglect of irrigation canals by a diminishing 
peasantry and a disordered government had left Italy poorer than before. 
The cause, however, was no inherent exhaustion of the soil, no change in 
climate, but the negligence and sterility of harassed and discouraged men. 

Biological factors were more fundamental. A serious decline of popula- 
tion appears in the West after Hadrian. It has been questioned, but the mass 
importation of barbarians into the Empire by Aurelius, Valentinian, Au- 
relian. Probus, and Constantine leaves little room for doubt.® Aurelius, to 
replenish his army, enrolled slaves, gladiators, policemen, criminals; either 
the crisis was greater, or the free population less, than before; and the slave 
population had certainly fallen. So many farms had been abandoned, above 
all in Italy, that Pertinax offered them gratis to anyone who would tiU them. 

665 



666 


CAESAR AND CHRIST 


A law of Septimius Severas speaks of a penuria hoimnmn—2. shortage of 
men.^ In Greece the depopulation had been going on for centuries. In Alex- 
andria, which had boasted of its numbers, Bishop Dionysius calculated that 
the population had in his time (250) been halved. He mourned to “see the 
human race diminishing and constantly wasting away.” ® Only the barbarians 
and the Orientals were increasing, outside the Empire and within. 

What had caused this fall in population? Above all, family limitation. 
Practiced first by the educated classes, it had now seeped down to a prole- 
tariat named for its fertihty;® by a.d. ioo it had reached the agricultural 
classes, as shown by the use of imperial alimenta to encourage rural par- 
entage; by the third century it had overrun the western provinces, and was 
lowering man power in Gaul.'^ Though branded as a crime, infanticide 
flourished as poverty grew.® Sexual excesses may have reduced human fer- 
tility; the avoidance or deferment of marriage had a like effect, and the 
making of eunuchs increased as Oriental customs flowed into the West, 
Plantianus, Praetorian Prefect, had one hundred boys emasculated, and then 
gave them to his daughter as a wedding gift.® 

Second only to family hmitation as a cause of lessened population were 
the slaughters of pestilence, revolution, and war. Epidemics of major pro- 
portions decimated the population under Aurelius, Gallienus, and Con- 
stantine. In the plague of 260-65 almost every family in the Empire was 
attacked; in Rome, we are told, there were 5000 deaths every day for many 
weeks.^® The mosquitoes of the Campagna were winning their war against 
the human invaders of the Pontine marshes, and malaria was sapping the 
strength of rich and poor in Latium and Tuscany. The holocausts pf war 
and revolution, and perhaps the operation of contraception, abortion, and 
infanticide, had a dysgenic as well as a numerical effect: the ablest men mar- 
ried latest, bred least, and died soonest. The dole weakened the poor, luxury 
weakened the rich; and a long peace deprived aU classes in the peninsula of 
the martial qualities and arts. The Germans who were now peopling north 
Italy and filling the army were physically and morally superior to the sur- 
viving native stock; if time had allowed a leisurely assimilation they might 
have absorbed the classic culture and reinvigorated the Italian blood. But 
time was not so generous. Moreover, the population of Italy had long since 
been mingled with Oriental strains physically inferior, though perhaps men- 
tally superior, to the Roman type. The rapidly breeding Germans could not 
understand the classic culture, did not accept it, did not transmit it; the 
rapidly breeding Orientals were mostly of a mind to destroy that culture; 
the Romans, possessing it, sacrificed it to the comforts of sterility. Rome was 
conquered not by barbarian invasion from without, but by barbarian multi- 
plication within. 



EPILOGUE 


667 

Moral decay contributed to the dissolution. The virile character that had 
been formed by arduous simplicities and a supporting faith relaxed in the 
sunshine of wealth and the freedom of unbelief; men had now, in the middle 
and upper classes, the means to yield to temptation, and only expediency to 
restrain them. Urban congestion multiplied contacts and frustrated sur- 
veillance; immigration brought together a hundred cultures whose differ- 
ences rubbed themselves out into indifference. Moral and esthetic standards 
were lowered by the magnetism of the mass; and sex ran riot in freedom 
while political liberty decayed. 

The greatest of historians held that Christianity was the chief cause of 
Rome’s fall.^^ For this religion, he and his followers argued, had destroyed 
the old faith that had given moral character to the Roman soul and stability 
to the Roman state. It had declared war upon the classic culture— upon 
science, philosophy, literature, and art. It had brought an enfeebling Ori- 
ental mysticism into the realistic stoicism of Roman life; it had turned men’s 
thoughts from the tasks of this world to an enervating preparation for some 
cosmic catastrophe, and had lured them into seeking individual salvation 
through asceticism and prayer, rather than collective salvation through de- 
votion to the state. It had disrupted the unity of the Empire while soldier 
emperors were struggling to preserve it; it had discouraged its adherents 
from holding office, or rendering military service; it had preached an ethic 
of nonresistance and peace when the survival of the Empire had demanded 
, a will to War. Christ’s victory had been Rome’s death. 

There is some truth in this hard indictment. Christianity unwillingly 
shared in the chaos of creeds that helped produce that medley of mores 
which moderately contributed to Rome’s collapse. But the growth of Chris- 
tianity Was more an effect than a cause of Rome’s decay. The breakup of 
the cld religion had begun long before Christ; there were more vigorous 
attacks upon it in Ennius and Lucretius than in any pagan author after them. 
Moral disintegration had begun with the Roman conquest of Greece, and 
had culminated under Nero; thereafter Roman morals improved, and the 
ethical influence of Christianity upon Roman life was largely a wholesome 
one. It Was because Rome was already dying that Christianity grew so 
rapidly. Men lost faith in the state not because Christianity held them aloof, 
but because the state defended wealth against poverty, fought tb capture 
slaves, taxed toil to support luxury, and failed to protect its people from 
famine, pestilence, invasion, and destitution; forgivably they turned from 
Caesar preaching war to Christ preacliing peace, from incredible brutahty 
to unprecedented charity, from a hfe without hope or dignity to a faith that 
consoled their poverty and honored their humanity. Rome was not destroyed 



CAESAR AND CHRIST 


668 

by Christianity, any more than by barbarian invasion; it was an empty shell 
when Christianity rose to influence and invasion came. 

The economic causes of Rome’s decline have already been stated as pre- 
requisite to the understanding of Diocletian’s reforms; they need only a re- 
minding summary here. The precarious dependence upon provincial grains, 
the collapse of the slave supply and the latifundia; the deterioration of trans- 
port and the perils of trade; the loss of provincial markets to provincial 
competition; the inability of Italian industry to export the equivalent of 
Italian imports, and the consequent drain of precious metals to the East; 
the destructive war beween rich and poor; the rising cost of armies, doles, 
public works, an expanding bureaucracy, and a parasitic court; the depreci- 
ation of the currency; the discouragement of ability, and the absorption of 
investment capital, by confiscatory taxation; the emigration of capital and 
labor, the strait jacket of serfdom placed upon agriculture, and of caste 
forced upon industry; all these conspired to sap the material bases of Italian 
life, until at last the power of Rome was a political ghost surviving its 
economic death. 

The political causes of decay were rooted in one fact— that increasing 
despotism destroyed the citizen’s civic sense and dried up statesmanship at 
its source. Powerless to express his pohtical will except by violence, the 
Roman lost interest in government and became absorbed in his business, his 
amusements, his legion, or his individual salvation. Patriotism and the pagan 
religion had been bound together, and now together decayed.^® The Senate, 
losing ever more of its power and prestige after Pertinax, relapsed into indo- 
lence, subservience, or venality; and the last barrier fell that might have 
saved the state from militarism and anarchy. Local governments, overrun by 
imperial correctores and exactores, no longer attracted first-rate men. The 
responsibility of municipal officials for the tax quotas of their areas, the 
rising expense of their unpaid honors, the fees, liturgies, benefactions, and 
games expected of them, the dangers incident to invasion and class war, led 
to a flig ht from office corresponding to the flight from taxes, factories, and 
farms. Men dehberately made themselves ineligible by debasing their social 
category; some fled to other towns, some became farmers, some monks. In 
313 Constantine extended to the Christian clergy that exemption from 
municipal office, and from several taxes, which pagan priests had tradi- 
tionally enjoyed; the Church was soon swamped with candidates for ordina- 
tion, and cities complained of losses in revenue and senators; in the end 
Constantine was compelled to rule that no man eligible for municipal po- 
sition should be admitted to the priesthood.^^ The imperial police pursued 
fugitives from political honors as it hunted evaders of taxes or conscription; 



EPILOGUE 


669 

it brought them back to the cities and forced them to serve; finally it 
decreed that a son must inherit the social status of his father, and must accept 
election if eligible to it by .his rank. A serfdom of office rounded out the 
prison of economic caste. 

Galhenus, fearing a revolt of the Senate, excluded senators from the army. 
As martial material no longer grew in Italy, this decree completed the mili- 
tary decline of the peninsula. The rise of provincial and mercenary armies, 
the overthrow of the Praetorian Guard by Septimius Severus, the emergence 
of provincial generals, and their capture of the imperial throne, destroyed 
the leadership, even the independence, of Italy long before the fall of the 
Empire in the West. The armies of Rome were no longer Roman armies; 
they were composed chiefly of provincials, largely of barbarians; they 
fought not for their altars and their homes, but for their wages, their dona- 
tives, and their loot. They attacked and plundered the cities of the Empire 
with more relish than they showed in facing the enemy; most of them were 
the sons of peasants who hated the rich and the cities as exploiters of the 
poor and the countryside; and as civil strife provided opportunity, they 
sacked such towns with a thoroughness that left little for ahen barbarism to 
destroy.^® When military problems became more important than internal 
affairs, cities near the frontiers were made the seats of government; Rome 
became a theater for triumphs, a show place of imperial architecture, a 
museum of political antiquities and forms. The multiplication of capitals and 
the division of power broke down the unity of administration. The Empire, 
grown too vast for its statesmen to rule or its armies to defend, began to 
disintegrate. Left to protect themselves unaided against the Germans and 
the Scots, Gaul and Britain chose their own imperatores, and made them 
sovereign; Palmyra seceded under Zenobia, and soon Spain and Africa would 
yield almost unresisting to barbarian conquest. In the reign of Galhenus 
thirty generals governed thirty regions of the Empire in practical inde- 
pendence of the central power. In this awful drama of a great state breaking 
into pieces, the internal causes were the unseen protagonists; the invading 
barbarians merely entered where weakness had opened the door, and where 
the failure of biological, moral, economic, and poHtical statesmanship had 
left the stage to chaos, despondency, and decay. 

Externally the fall of the Western Roman Empire was hastened by the expan- 
sion and migration of the Hsiung-nu, or Huns, in northwestern Asia. Defeated 
in their eastward advance by Chinese armies and the Chinese Wall, they turned 
westward, and about a.d. 355 reached the Volga and the Oxus. Their pressure 
forced the Sarmatians of Russia to move into the Balkans; the Goths, so harassed, 
moved again upon the Roman frontiers. They were admitted across the Danube 



CAESAR AND CHRIST 


670 

to settle in Moesia (376); maltreated there by Roman officials, they revolted, 
defeated a large Roman army at Adrianople (378), and for a time threatened 
Constantinople. In 400 Alaric led the Visigoths over the Alps into Italy, and in 410 
they took and sacked Rome. In 429 Gaiseric led the Vandals to the conquest of 
Spain and Africa, and in 455 they took and sacked Rome. In 451 Attila led the 
Huns in an attack upon Gaul and Italy; he was defeated at Chalons, but overran 
Lombardy. In 472 a Pannonian general, Orestes, made his son emperor under 
the name of Romulus Augustulus. Four years later the barbarian mercenaries 
who dominated the Roman army deposed this “little Augustus,” and named 
their leader Odoacer king of Italy. Odoacer recognized the supremacy of the 
Roman emperor at Constantinople, and was accepted by him as a vassal king. 
The Roman Empire in the East would go on until 1453; in the West it had come 
to an end. 


n. THE ROMAN ACHIEVEMENT 

It is easier to explain Rome’s fall than to account for her long survival, 
This is the essential accomplishment of Rome— that having won the Medi^ 
terranean world she adopted its culture, gave it order, prosperity, aod peace 
for 200 years, held back the tide of barbarism for two centuries more, and 
transmitted the classic heritage to the West before she died. 

Rome has had no rival in the art of government. The Roman state com- 
mitted a thousand political crimes; it built its edifice upon a selfish oligarchy 
and an obscurantist priesthood; it achieved a democracy of freemen, and 
then destroyed it with corruption and violence; it exploited its conquests to 
support a parasitic Italy, which, when it could no longer exploit, collapsed. 
Here and there, in East and W'est, it created a desert and called it peace. But 
amid all this evil it formed a majestic system of law which through nearly 
all Europe gave security to life and property, incentive and continuity to 
industry, from the Decemvirs to Napoleon. It molded a government of 
separated legislative and executive powers whose checks and balances in= 
spired the makers of constitutions as late as revolutionary America and 
France. For a time it united monarchy, aristocracy, and democracy so suc- 
cessfully as to win the applause of philosophers, historians, subjects, and 
enemies. It gave municipal institutions, and for a long period municipal 
freedom, to half a thousand cities. It administered its Empire at first with 
greed and cruelty, then with such tolerance and essential justice that the 
great realm has never again known a like content. It made the desert blossom 
with civilization, and atoned for its sins with the miracle of a lasting peace. 
Today our highest labors seek to revive the Pax Ro7nma for a disordered 
world. 

Within that unsurpassed framework Rome built a culture Greek in origin. 



EPILOGUE 


671 

Roman in application and result. She was too engrossed in government to 
create as bountifully in the realms of the mind as Greece had done; but she 
absorbed with appreciation, and preserved with tenacity, the technical, intel- 
lectual, and artistic heritage that she had received from Carthage and Egypt, 
Greece and the East. She made no advance in science, and no mechanical 
improvements in industry, but she enriched the world with a commerce 
moving over secure seas, and a network of enduring roads that became the 
arteries of a lusty life. Along those roads, and over a thousand handsome 
bridges, there passed to the medieval and modem worlds the ancient tech- 
niques of tillage, handicraft, and art, the science of monumental building, 
the processes of banking and investment, the organization of medicine and 
military hospitals, the sanitation of cities, and many varieties of fruit and 
nut trees, of agricultural or ornamental plants, brought from the East to 
take new root in the West. Even the secret of central heating came from 
the warm south to the cold north. The south has created the civilizations, the 
north has conquered and destroyed or borrowed them. 

Rome did not invent education, but she developed it on a scale unknown 
before, gave it state support, and formed the curriculum that persisted till 
our harassed youth. She did not invent the arch, the vault, or the dome, but 
she used them with such audacity and magnificence that in some fields her 
architecture has remained unequaled; and all the elements of the medieval 
cathedral were prepared in her basilicas. She did not invent the sculptural 
portrait, but she gave it a realistic power rarely reached by the idealizing 
Greeks. She did not invent philosophy, but it was in Lucretius and Seneca 
that Epicureanism and Stoicism found their most finished form. She did not 
invent the types of literature, not even the satire; but who could adequately 
record the influence of Cicero on oratory, the essay, and prose style, of 
Virgil on Dante, Tasso, Milton, ... of Livy and Tacitus on the writing 
of history, of Horace and Juvenal on Dryden, Swift, and Pope? 

Her language became, by a most admirable corruption, the speech of 
Italy, Rumania, Erance, Spain, Portugal, and Latin America; half the white 
man’s world speaks a Latin tongue. Latin was, till the eighteenth century, 
the Esperanto of science, scholarship, and philosophy in the West; it gave 
a convenient international terminology to botany and zoology; it survives 
in the sonorous ritual and official documents of the Roman Church; it still 
writes medical prescriptions, and haunts the phraseology of the law. It 
entered by direct appropriation, and again through the Romance languages 
{regalis, regal, royal; paganus, pagan, peasant), to enhance the wealth and 
flexibihty of English speech. Our Roman heritage works in our fives a thou- 
sand times a day. 

When Christianity conquered Rome the ecclesiastical structure of the 



CAESAR AND CHRIST 


672 

pagan church, the title and vestments of the pontifex vtaximiis, the worship 
of the Great Mother and a multitude of comforting divinities, the sense of 
supersensible presences everywhere, the joy or solemnity of old festivals, 
and the pageantry of immemorial ceremony, passed like maternal blood into 
the new rehgion, and captive Rome captured her conqueror. The reins and 
skills of government were handed down by a dying empire to a virile 
papacy; the lost power of the broken sword was rewon by the magic of the 
consoling word; the armies of the state were replaced by the missionaries 
of the Church moving in all directions along the Roman roads; and the 
revolted provinces, accepting Christianity, again acknowledged the sov- 
ereignty of Rome. Through the long struggles of the Age of Faith the 
authority of the ancient capital persisted and grew, until in the Renaissance 
the classic culture seemed to rise from the grave, and the immortal city 
became once more the center and summit of the world’s hfe and wealth and 
art. When, in 1936, Rome celebrated the 2689th anniversary of her founda- 
tion, she could look back upon the most impressive continuity of govern- 
ment and civilization in the history of mankind. May she rise again. 

THANK YOU, PATIENT READER. 



Bibliographical Guide 

to books mentioned in the Notes 
(Books marked toith cm asterisk are recommended for further study.) 

Abbott, F., The Common People of Ancient Rome, N. Y., 191 1. 

Acton, Lord, The History of Freedom, London, 1907. 

Alciphron, Letters, London, n.d. 

Anderson, W., and Spiers, R., The Architecture of Greece and Rome, Lon- 
don, 1902. 

Apocrypha and Pseudepigrapha of the Old Testament, Oxford, 191 3. 2V. 
Appian, Roman History, Loeb Classical Library. 4V. 

Apuleius, The Golden Ass, tr. W. Adlington, N. Y., 1927. 

Aristotle, Physics, Loeb Library. 2V. 

* Politics, Everyman Library. 

Arnold, W., Roman System of Provincial Administration, Oxford, 1914. 
Arrian, Anabasis of Alexander, London, 1893. 

Athenaeus, The Deipnosophists, London, 1854, 3V. 

Augustine, St., The City of God, London, 1934. 

Select Letters, Loeb Library. 

Augustus, Res gestae, Loeb Library. 

Bailey, C., The Legacy of Rome, Oxford, n.d. 

Ball, W. W., Short History of Mathematics, London, 1888. 

Balsdon, J., The Emperor Gaius, Oxford, 1934. 

*Barnes, H. E., History of Western Civilization, N. Y., 1935. 2V. 

Baron, S., Social and Religious History of the Jews, N. Y., 1937. 3V. 

Battifol, L., The Century of the Renaissance, N. Y., 1935. 

Beard, M., History of the Business Man, N. Y., 1938. 

Bevan, E., The House of Seleucus, London, 1902, 2V. 

The Legacy of Israel, Oxford, 1927. 

*Bible, Revised Version of the King James Translation. 

Bieber, M., History of the Greek and Roman Theater, Princeton, 1939. 

Bigg, C., Neo-Platonism, London, 1935. 

Boissier, G., L’Afrique romaine, Paris, 1935. 

* Cicero and His Friends, N. Y., n.d. 

La fin du paganisme, Paris, 1894. 

L’opposition sous les Cesars, Paris, 1875. 

La religion romaine, Paris, 1909. 2V. 

Rome and Pompeii, London, 1896. 

Tacitus and Other Roman Studies, London, 1906. 

Books of Enoch and Wisdom, cf. Apocrypha. 

Bouchier, E., Life and Letters in Roman Africa, Oxford, 1913. 

Breasted, J., Ancient Times, Boston, 1916. 

Oriental Forerunners of Byzantine Painting, Chicago, 1924. 
Breccia, E., Alexandrea ad Aegyptum, Bergamo, 1922. 

673 



CAESAR AND CHRIST 


674 

Brittain, A., Roman Women, Philadelphia, 1907. 

Buchan, J., Augustus, N. Y., 1937. 

Buckland, W., Textbook of Roman Law, Cambridge U.P., 1921. 

Burckhardt, J., Die Zeit Constantins des Grossen, Phaidon Verlag, Wien, n.d. 
Bury, J., History of the Roman Empire, N. Y., n.d. 

History of Freedom of Thought, N. Y., n.d. 

Caesar, J., De bello civili, Loeb Library. 

De bello Gallico, Loeb Library. 

Cambridge Ancient History, N. Y., i924f. i2V. 

Cambridge Medieval History, N. Y., 1924^ 8v. 

Capes, W., University Life in Ancient Athens, N. Y., 1922. 

Carpenter, Edw., Pagan and Christian Creeds, N. Y., 1920. 

Carter, T., The Invention of Printing in China, N. Y., 1925. 

*Castiglione, a.. History of Medicine, N. Y., 1941. 

Catholic Encyclopedia, N. Y., 1913. i6v. 

Cato, M., De agri cultura, Loeb Library. 

Catullus, Poems, tr. Horace Gregory, N. Y., 1931. 

*Catullus, Tibullus, and Pervigilium V'^eneris, Loeb Librarsu 
Charles WORTH, M., Trade Routes and Commerce of the Roman Empire, Cam- 
bridge U.P., 1926. 

Cicero, Academica, Loeb Library. 

De divinatione, Loeb Library. 

De finibus, Loeb Library. 

De legibus, Loeb Library. 

De natura Deorum, Loeb Library. 

De officiis, Everyman Library. 

De re publica, Loeb Library. 

* De senectute and De amicitia, Loeb Library. 

Disputationes Tusculanae, Loeb Library. 

Letters, tr. Melmoth; cf. Middleton. 

Pro Alilone and Other Speeches, Loeb Library. 

Clement of Alexandria, Writings and Opinions, ed. Kaye, London, n.d. 
COLLINGWOOD, R., and Myres, N., Roman Britain, Oxford, 1937. 

Columella, De re rustica, Loeb Library. 

CoNYBEARE, W. J., and Howson, j. S., Life, Times, and Travels of St. Paul, 
N. Y., 1869. 2v. 

C0UL.VNGES, F. DE, The Ancient City, Boston, 1901. 

CuMONT, F., Oriental Religions in Roman Paganism, Chicago, 19 n. 
Cunningham, W^. C., Western Civilization in Its Economic Aspects, Cambridge 
U.P., 1900. 2V. 

Davis, W. S., Influence of Wealth in Imperial Rome, N. Y., 191 3. 

Davis, W. S., and West, W. .M., Readings in Ancient History, Boston, 1912. 
Declareuil, j., Rome the Law-Giver, N. Y., 1926. 

Dennis, G., Cities and Cemeteries of Etruria, Everyman Library. 2V. 

*Dill, Sir S., Roman Society from Nero to Marcus Aurelius, London, 191 1. 

Dio Cassius, History of Rome, Troy, N. Y., 1905. 8v. 



BIBLIOGRAPHICAL GUIDE 


675 


Dio Chrysostom, Orations, Loeb Library. 3 V. 

Diodorus Siculus, Library of History, Loeb Library. lov. 

Dionysius of Halicarnassus, Roman Antiquities, London, 1 758. 4V. 

Doughi y, G., Travels in Arabia Deserta, N. Y., 1923. 2V. 

Duchesne, Mon. L., Early History of the Christian Church, London, 1933. 3V. 
Duff, J., Literary History of Rome, London, 1909. 

Literary History of Rome in the Silver Age, N. Y., 1930. 

Duruy, V., History of the Roman People, Boston, 1883. 8v. 

Edersheim, a.. Life and Times of Jesus the Messiah, N. Y., n.d. 2v. 
Encyclopaedia Britannica, 14th ed. 24V. 

*Epictetus, Works, Loeb Library. 2V. 

Encheiridion, Girard, Kan., n.d, 

Eusebius Pamphilus, Ecclesiastical History, N. Y., 1839. 

Historical View of the Council of Nice, in preceding. 

Life of Constantine, in Ancient Ecclesiastical Histories, London, 
1650. 

Praeparatio evangelica, Oxford, 1843. 

Fattorusso, J., Wonders of Italy, Florence, 1930. 

Ferrero, G., Ancient Rome and Modem America, N. Y., 1914. 

* Greatness and Decline of Rome, N. Y., 1909. 5V. 

The Ruin of Ancient Civilization, N. Y., 1921. 

The Women of the Caesars, N. Y. n.d. 

Finkelstein, L., Akiba, N. Y., 1936. 

•Flaubert, G., Salammbo, Modern Library. 

Flick, A. C., Rise of the Medieval Church, N. Y., 1909. 

Foakes-Jackson, F., and Lake, K., Beginnings of Christianity, London, 1920. 5V. 
Fowler, W. W., Religious Experience of the Roman People, London, 1933. 

Roman Festivals of the Period of the Republic, N. Y., 1899. 
Social Life at Rome, N. Y., 1927. 

Frank, T., Economic History of Rome, Baltimore, 1927. 

Roman Imperialism, N. Y., 1914. 

Economic Survey of Ancient Rome, Baltimore, 1933^ 5V. 

Frazer, Sir J., Adonis, Attis, and Osiris, London, 1907. 

The Magic Art, N. Y., 1935. 2V. 

The Scapegoat, N. Y., 1935. 

Spirits of the Corn and Wild, N. Y., 1935. 2V. 

*Friedlander, L., Roman Life and Manners under the Roman Empire, London, 
1928. 4V. 

Frontinus, Stratagems and Aqueducts, Loeb Libraiy. 

Fronto, M., Correspondence, Loeb Library. 

Gaius, Elements of Roman Law, ed. Poste, Oxford, 1875. 

Galen, On the Natural Faculties, Loeb Library. 

Gardiner, E., Athletics of the Ancient World, Oxford, 1930. 

Gellius, Aulus, Attic Nights, Loeb Library. 3V. 

Garrison, F., Histoiy^ of Medicine, Phila., 1929. 



676 CAESAR AND CHRIST 

Gatteschi, G., Restauri della Roma Imperiale, Rome, 1924. 

Gest, a., Roman Engineering, N. Y., 1930. 

Gibbon, E., Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire, Everyman Library. 6 v. 

Ed. Bury, J. B., London, 1900. 7V. Only when so specified. 

Glover, T. R., The Conflict of Religions in the Early Roman Empire, London, 
1932. 

Goguel, M., Life of Jesus, N. Y., 1933. 

Goodspeed, E. J., The New Testament, an American Translation, Univ. of 
Chicago, 1937. 

Graetz, H., History of the Jews, Phila., 1891. 6v. 

Greek Anthology, Loeb Library. 

Guhl, E., and Koner, W., Life of the Greeks and the Romans, N. Y., 1876. 
Guignebert, C., Christianity Past and Present, N. Y., 1927. 

Jesus, N. Y., 1935 

Gummere, R., Seneca the Philosopher, Boston, 1927 

Hadzsits, G., Lucretius and His Influence, London, 1935. 

Haggard, H., Devils, Drugs, and Doctors, N. Y., 1929. 

Halliday, W. R., The Pagan Background of Early Christianity, London, 1925. 
Hammerton, j.. Universal History of the World, London, n.d. 8v. 

Harrison, Jane, Prolegomena to the Study of Greek Religion, Cambridge 
U.P., 1922. 

Haskell, H., The New Deal in Old Rome, N. Y., 1939. 

Hastings, J., Encyclopedia of Religion and Ethics, N. Y., 1928. i2V. 

Hatch, E., Influence of Greek Ideas and Usages upon the Christian Church, 
London, 1890. 

Havereield, F., The Romanization of Roman Britain, Oxford, 1923. 

The Roman Occupation of Britain, Oxford, 1924. 

Heath, Sir T., History of Greek Mathematics, Oxford, 1921. 2V. 

Heine, H., Memoirs, London, 1910. 2V. 

Heitland, W., Agricola, Cambridge U.P., 1921. 

Heliodorus, Longus, etc., Greek Romances, London, 1901. 

Henderson, B., Life and Principate of the Emperor Hadrian, N. Y., n.d. 

Life and Principate of the Emperor Nero, Phda., 1903. 
Herodian, History of Twenty Caesars, London, 1629. 

*Herodotus, History, ed. Rawlinson, London, 1862. 4V. 

Himes, N., Medical History of Contraception, Baltimore, 1936. 

Historiae Augustae, Loeb Library, 2V. 

Holmes, T. R., The Architect of the Roman Empire, Oxford, 1928. 2V. 

Homo, L., Primitive Italy, London, 1927. 

Roman Political Institutions, N. Y., 1930. 

♦Horace, Odes and Epodes, Loeb Library. 

Satires and Epistles, Loeb Library. 

Howard, C., Sex Worship, Chicago, 1909. 

Inge, Dean W. R., The Philosophy of Plotinus, London, 1929. 2V. 

Irenaeus, Adversus haereses, Oxford, 1872. 



BIBLIOGRAPHICAL GUIDE 


677 


Jerome, Select Letters, Loeb Library. 

Jones, A., Cities of the Eastern Roman Provinces, Oxford, 1937. 

Jones, H., Companion to Roman Histor)% Oxford, 1912. 

Jones, W., Malaria and Roman History, Manchester U.P., 1909, 

Josephus, Works, tr. Whiston, Boston, 18 1 1, 2V. 

JuLLiAN, C., Histoire de la Gaule, Paris, 1908. 6v. 

Justinian, Digest; cf. Scott, S. P. 

*JuvENAL AND Persius, Satires, Loeb Library. 

Juvenal, Persius, Sulpicia, and Lucilius, Satires, tr. Gifford, London, 1852. 

Kalthoff, a.. Rise of Christianity, London, 1907. 

Kautsky, K., Ursprung des Christentums, Vienna, 1908. 

Klausner, J., From Jesus to Paul, N. Y., 1943. 

Jesus of Nazareth, N. Y., 1929. 

Kohler, C., History of Costume, N. Y., 1928. 

Lactantius, Works, in Ante-Nicene Christian Library, vols. XXI-II, London, 
1881. 

Lake, K., ed.. The Apostolic Fathers, Loeb Library. 2V. 

Lanciani, R., Ancient Rome, Boston, 1 899. 

Lang, P., Music in Western Civilization, N. Y., 1941. 

Lea, H. C., Historical Sketch of Sacerdotal Celibacy, Boston, 1884. 

Lecky, W., History of European Morals, N. Y., 1926. 2V. 

Leslie Shane, The Greek Anthology, N. Y., 1929. 

Livingstone, R. W., The Legacy of Greece, Oxford, 1924. 

Livy, T., History of Rome, Everyman Library. 6v. 

Longinus on the Sublime, Loeb Library. 

Lot, Ferdinand, End of the Ancient World, N. Y., 1931. 

Lucan, Pharsalia, Loeb Library. 

*Lucian, Works, tr. Fowler, Oxford, 1905, 4V. 

*Lucretius, De rerum natura, Loeb Library. 

MacGregor, R., The Greek Anthology, London, n.d. 

MacKenna, Stephen, The Essence of Plotinus, N. Y., 1934. 

Macrobius, Works, French tr., Paris, 1827. 2V. 

Opera, London, 1694. , 

Mahaffy, J., The Silver Age of the Greek World, Chicago, 1906. 

Maine, Sir H., Ancient Law, Everyman Library. \ 

Maiuri, a., Les fresques de Pompeii, Paris, n.d. 

Pompeii, Rome, n.d. 

Mantzius, K., History of Theatrical Art, N. Y., 1937- 6v. 

*Marcus Aurelius, Meditations, tr. Long, Boston, 1876. 

Martial, Epigrams, Loeb Library. 2V. 

Matthews, B., Development of the Drama, N. Y., 192 1. 

Mau, a., Pompeii, N. Y., 1902. 

Merivale, C., History of the Romans under the Empire, London, 1865. 8v. 
Middleton, C., Life of Marcus Tullius Cicero, London, 1877. 

Minucius, Felix, Octavius, in Tertullian, Apologeticus, Loeb Library. 



678 CAESAR AND CHRIST 

Momigliano, a., Claudius, Oxford, 1934. 

*Mommsen, T., History of Rome, London, 1901. 5V. 

The Provinces of the Roman Empire, N. Y., 1887. 2V. 

Monroe, P., Source Book of the History of Education for the Greek and Roman 
Period, N. Y., 1932. 

Montesquieu, Charles de. Grandeur et Decadence des Remains, Paris, 1924. 
Moore, G. F., Judaism in the First Centuries of the Christian Era, Cambridge, 
Mass., 1932. 2V. 

Muller-Lyer, F., Evolution of Modern Marriage, N. Y., 1930. 

Murray, G., Five Stages of Greek Religion, Oxford, 1930. 

Nepos, Cornelius, Lives, N. Y., 1895. 

Ovid, Ars amatoria, Loeb Library. 

Fasti, Loeb Library. 

Heroides and Amores, Loeb Library. 

Love Books of, tr. May, N. Y., 1930. 

Metamorphoses, Loeb Library. 2v. 

Tristia and Ex Ponto, Loeb Library. 

Owen, John, Evenings with the Sceptics, London, 1881. 2V. 

Pater, Walter, Marius the Epicurean, N. Y., n.d. 

Paul-Louis, Ancient Rome at Work, N. Y., 1927. 

Pfuhl, E., Masterpieces of Greek Drawing and Painting, London, 1926. 

Pk;lo, Works, Loeb Library, gv. 

Philostratus, Life of Apollonius of Tyana, Loeb Library. 2v. 

Philostratus and Eunapius, Lives of the Sophists, Loeb Library. 

Plautus, Comedies, London, 1889. 

Pliny the Elder, Natural History, London, 1855. 6v. 

•Pliny THE Younger, Letters, Loeb Library. 

Plotinus, Select Works, London, 1912. 

Plutarch, De Iside et Osiride, French tr., Paris, 1924. 

De tranquillitate animi, tr. Harvard U.P., 1931. 

Lives, Everyman Library. 3V. 

Moralia, Loeb Library. 

Quaestiones Romanae, tr. Holland, London, 1892. 

Polybius, Histories, Loeb Library. 6v. 

Pope, A. U., Survey of Persian Art, London, 193S. 6v. 

Porphyry, Life of Plotinus, in MacKenna, S., The Essence of Plotinus N Y 
1934. 

Propertius, Poems, Loeb Library. 

Quintilian, Institutes of Oratory, Loeb Library. 4V. 

Ramsay, W. M., The Church in the Roman Empire, N. Y., 1893 

Randall-MacIver, D., The Etruscans, O.xford, 1927. ’ 

Rawlinson, G., The Sixth Great Oriental Alonarch, N. Y. n d 
Reid, J., Municipahties of the Roman Empire, Cambridge U.P., 1913. 



BIBLIOGRAPHICAL GUIDE 679 

Reinach, S., Apollo, a History of Art, N. Y., 1917. 

A Short History of Christianity, N. Y., 1922. 

Renan, E., Antichrist, London, n.d. 

The Apostles, London, n.d. 

The Christian Church, London, n.d. 

Lectures on the Influence of Rome on Christianity, London, 1884. 
Life of Jesus, N. Y., n.d. 

Marc Aurele, Paris, n.d. 

St. Paul, Paris, n.d. 

Robertson, J. M., Short History of Freethought, London, 1914. 2V. 
Rodenwaldt, G., Die Kunst der Antike: Hellas und Rom, Berlin, 1927. 
Rostovtzeef, M., History of the Ancient World, Oxford, 1928, i\. 

Mystic Italy, N. Y., 1927. 

Social and Economic History of the Hellenistic World, N. Y., 
1942. 3V. 

Social and Economic History of the Roman Empire, Oxford, 
1926. 

Sachar, a.. History of the Jews, N. Y., 1932. 

Sallust, Works, Loeb Library. 

Sandys, Sir J., Companion to Latin Studies, Cambridge U.P., 1925. 

Sarton, G., Introduction to the History of Science, Baltimore, 1930. Vol. I. 
Schurer, E., History of the Jewish People in the Times of Jesus, N. Y., 1890. 6v. 
*ScHtvEiTZER, A., The Quest of the Historical Jesus, London, 1926. 

Scott, E. F., First Age of Christianity, N. Y., 1935. 

Scott, S. P., The Civil Law of Rome, Cincinnati, 1932. 17V. 

Seneca, Epistulae Morales, Loeb Library. 2V. 

Aloral Essays, Loeb Library. 3V. 

Quaestiones naturales, tr. in Clarke, Physical Science in the Time of 
Nero, London, 1910. 

Tragedies, Loeb Library. 2V. 

Sextus Empiricus, Works, Loeb Library. 3V. 

Opera, Leipzig, 1 840. 2V. 

Shotwell, j.. Introduction to the History of History, N. Y., 1936. 

Shotwell, j., and Loomis, L., The See of Peter, Columbia U.P., 1927. 

SiDONius Apollinaris, Poems, Loeb Library. 

Simpson, F., History of Architectural Development, London, 1921. Vol. I. 
Smith, R. B., Carthage and the Carthaginians, N. Y., 1908. 

Smith, Wm., Dictionary of Greek and Roman Antiquities, Boston, 1859. 
Sellar, W., Horace and the Elegiac Poets, Oxford, 1937. 

Roman Poets of the Augustan Age; Virgil, Oxford, 1877. 

Roman Poets of the Republic, Oxford, i88i. 

Socrates, Ecclesiastical History, London, 1892. 

Statius, Poems, Loeb Library. 2V. 

Strabo, Geography, Loeb Library. 8v. 

Strong, E., Art in Ancient Rome, N. Y., 1928. 2V. 

Suetonius, Works, Loeb Library. 2V. 



68o CAESAR AND CHRIST 

•Sumner, W. G., Folkways, Boston, 1906. 

War and Other Essays, Yale U.P., 191 1. 

Syme, R., The Roman Revolution, Oxford, 1939. 

Symonds, J. a.. Studies of the Greek Poets, London, 1920. 

•Tacitus, Annals, Loeb Library. 

* Histories, Loeb Library. 

Works, tr. Murphy, London, 1830. 

Taine, H., Essai sur Tite Live, Paris, 1874. 

Modem Regime, N. Y., 1890. 2V. 

Talmud, Babylonian, tr., London, 1935^ 24V. 

Tarn, W. W., Hellenistic Civilization, London, 1927. 

Taylor, H., Cicero, Chicago, 1916. 

Terence, Comedies, London, 1898. 

Tertullian, Apologeticus, etc., Loeb Library. 

Thierry, A., Histoire de la Gaule sous I’administration romaine, Paris, 1840. 3V. 
Thompson, Sir E., Introduction to Greek and Latin Paleography, Oxford, 1912. 
Thorndike, L., History of Magic and Experimental Science, N. Y., 1929. 2V. 
Thucydides, History of the Peloponnesian War, Everyman Library. 

Tibullus, Poems, cf. Catullus. 

Toutain, J., Economic Life of the Ancient World, N. Y., 1930. 

Toynbee, A. J., A Study of History, Oxford, 1935. 3V. 

Trench, R., Plutarch, London, 1874. 

Ueberweg, F., History of Philosophy, N. Y., 1871. 2V. 

Usher, A., History of Mechanic^ Inventions, N. Y., 1929. 

Valerius Maximus, Factorum et dictorum, Berlin, 1854. 

Varro, M., Rerum rusticarum, Loeb Library. 

•Virgil, Poems, Loeb Library. 2V. 

Vitruvius, De architectura, Loeb Library. 

VoGELSTEiN, H., Rome, Phila., 1940. 

Voltaire, Philosophical Dictionary, N. Y., 1901. 

Ward, C. O., The Ancient Lowdy, Chicago, 1907. 2V. 

Watson, P. B., Marcus Aurelius Antoninus, N. Y., 1 884. 

Weigall, a.. The Paganism in Our Christianity, N. Y., 1928. 

Weise, O., Language and Character of the Roman People, London, 1909. 
Westermarck, E., Origin and Development of the Moral Ideas, London, 

1917. 2 V. 

White, E. L., Why Rome Fell, N. Y., 1927. 

Wickhoff, F., Roman Art, London, 1900. 

Williams, H., History of Science, N. Y., 1909. 5V. 

WiNCKELMANN, J., History of Ancient Art, Boston, 1880. 2V. 

Wright, F., History of Later Greek Literature, N. Y., 1932. 

Zeitlin, S., The Jews, Phila., 1936. 

The Pharisees and the Gospels, N. Y., 1938. 



Notes 

Capital Roman numerals, except at the beginning of a note, will usually indicate volumes, 
followed by page numbers; small Roman numerals will usually indicate books ^ (main 
divisions) of a classical text, followed by chapter or verse numbers, and sometimes additionally 
by section or paragraph numbers. 


CHAPTER I 


1. Pliny, Natural History, xxxvii, 77. 

2. Virgil, Georgies, ii, 149. 

3. Ibid., ii, 198. 

4. Strabo, Geography, v, 4. 8. 

5. Polybius, History, i, 2. 15. 

6. In Taine, Modem Regime, 17. 

7. Aristotle, Physics, 1329b. 

k Thucydides, Peloponnesian War, vi, 
18. 2. 


9. Homo, Primitive Italy, 32; Toutain, 
Economic Life of the Ancient World, 

207. 

10. Dennis, Cities and Cemeteries of Etruria, 
I, 36. 

11. Herodotus, Histories, v, 94; Strabo, v, 

I. 2; Tacitus, Annals, iv, 55; Appian, Ro- 
man History, viii, 9. 6d; etc. Dionysius 
of Halicarnassus, i, 30, regarded the 
Etruscans as indigenous to Italy; so did 
Mommsen, History of Rome, I, 155. 
Dennis, I, 17, Frank, Economic History 
of Rome, 16, Randall-Maciver, Etrus- 
cans, 23, and Rostovtzeff, History of the 
Ancient World, II, 180, accept the tradi- 
tion. 

12. Dennis, I, 39. 

13. Paul-Louis, Ancient Rome at Work, 66; 
Toutain, 21 1. 

14. Dennis, I, 329. 

15. Athenaeus, Deipnosophists, xii, 3. 

16. Garrison, History of Medicine, 1 19. 

17. Castighone, History of Medicine, 192. 

18. Aristotle in Athenaeus, i, 19; Dennis, I, 


29. Ovid, Fasti, iii, 15. 

30. Livy, History of Rome, i, 9-13. 

31. Frazer, II, 289. 

32. Livy, i, 19. 

33. Tacitus, Annals, iii, 26. 

34. Cicero, De re publica, ii, 14. 

35. Livy, i, 22. 

36. Ibid., 27. 

37. Dio Cassius, History of Rome, frag- 
ment vii. 

38. Strabo, v, 2. 2. 

39. Livy, i, 35. , , „ 

40. Pais, E., Ancient Legends of Roman 
History, 38. 

41. Cicero, Republica, ii, 21. 

42. Livy, i, 46. 

43. Pais, 137-8. 

44. Dio, iii, 7, and frag, x, 2. 

45. Livy, i. 56-7. 

46. Syme, R., The Roman Revolution, 85n. 

47. Cicero, Republica, i, 39; Coulanges, F., 
The Ancient City, 384. 

48. Tacitus, Histories, iii, 72. 

49. Mommsen, 1 , 414. 

50. Dennis, I, 26. 

51. Duff, J. W., Literary History of Rome, 
6; CAH, IV, 407. 

52. Livy, i, 8; Strabo, v, 2. 2; Dennis, II, 166. 

53. CAH, VII, 384. 

54. Livy, i, 8. 

55. CAH, VIII, 387; Hammerton, J., Uni- 
versal History of the W orld, II, 1158. 

56. Strabo, v, 2. 2. 


321. 

19. Ibid., 21. 

20. Cambridge Ancient History, IV, 415. 

21. Frazer, Sir J., Magic Art, II, 287. 

22. Scholiast on Juvenal, vi, 565. 

23. Frazer, 1 . c. 

24. CAH, IV, 420-1; Mommsen, I, 232-3; 
Dennis, II, i68. 

25. Enc. Brit., VIII, 787. 

26. Anderson and Spiers, Architecture of 
Greece and Rome, 121; Strong, E., Art 
in Ancient Rome, 21; CAH, VII, 386. 

27. Pliny, XXXV, 6. 

28. Rodenwaldt, G., Die Ktinst der Antike: 
Hellas, 509. 

681 


CHAPTER n 

1. Livy, i, 8. 

2. Aulus Gellius, Attic Nights, vi, 13. 

3. Livy, ii, 56; CAH, VII, 456. 

4. Aldus Gellius, xx, 1. 45-51; Dio, frag. 

xvi, 4. 

5. Livy, ii, 23-30; Dio, iv, 7 and frag, xvi, 
6; Dionysius, vi, 45; Plutarch, “Corio- 
lanus." 

6. Livy, iv, 13; Dio, vi, 7. 

7. Livy, iii, 52. 

8. Dio, V, 7. 

9. Ibid. 

10. Livy, i, 43. 



(chap, hi 


CAESAR AND CHRIST 


682 

11. Frank, Economic History, 20; Smith, 
W., Dictionary of Greek and Roman 
Antiquities, s. v. exercitus. 

12. Mommsen, III, 60. 

13. Plutarch, “Pyrrhus.” 

14. Coulanges, 244. 

15. Dio, iv, 7. 

16. Twelve Tables, iv, 1-3, in Monroe, P., 
Source Book, 337. 

17. Twelve Tables, iii, i-< 5 . 

1 8. Ibid., viii, 3. 

19. Ibid., 21-26. 

20. Cicero, Pro Roscio Amerino, 25-6. 

21. Polybius, iii, 6. 

22. Livy, vii, 24. 

23. Vitruvius, De Architectura, ii, 12. 

24. Polybius, vi, 37. 

25. Frontinus, Stratagems and Aqueducts, 

iv, I. 

26. Frank, Economic History, 338; Id., Eco- 
nomic Survey of Ancient Rome, V, 160; 
Fowler, W. W., Social Life at Rome, 32; 
Edwards, H. J., Appendix A to Caesar, 
Gallic War. 

27. Dio, vi, 95. 

28. Livy, ii, 34; Dionysius, vii, 50; Dio, v, 
7 and frag, xvii, 2; Appian, Roman His- 
tory, ii, 5; Plutarch, “Coriolanus.” 

29. Polybius, ii, 1 5-20. 

30. Livy, V, 42. 

31. Dio, vii, 7. 

32. Coulanges, 494. 

33. Plutarch, “Sayings of Great Command- 
ers,” in Moralia, 184C. 

CHAPTER III 

1. Mommsen, II, 138. 

2. Smith, R. B., Carthage, 29. 

3. Appian, viii, 95. 

4. Polybius, vi, 56. 

5. Plutarch, De re publica get., iii, 6. 

6. Frazer, Adonis, Attis, Osiris, I, 1 14. 

7. Diodorus Siculus, Library of History, 

XX, 14. 

8. St. Augustine, Letters, xvii, 2. 

9. Appian, viii, 127. 

10. Aristotle, Politics, 1272b. 

11. Ibid., 1273a. 

12. Polybius, iii, 22. 

13. Strabo, xvii, i. 19. 

14. Polybius, i, 20-1. 

1 5. Cicero, De Officiis, iii, 26; In Pisonem, 43. 

16. Gellius, vii, 4. 

17. Polybius, i. 80. 

ik Smith, R. B., Carthage, 151. 

19. Polybius, i, 87. Flaubert has told the 
story with perfect art in Salanmibo. 

20. Mommsen, ii, 223. 


21. Dio, frag. Iii, 2. 

22. Livy, xxi, 4. 

23. Mommsen, II, 243. 

24. Livy, xxi, 22. 

25. Plutarch, Moralia, 195D. 

26. Livy, xxii, 57. 

27. Polybius, ii, 75, 118. 

28. Livy, xxii, 50. 

29. Livy, xxviii, 12. 

30. Diodorus, xxvii, 9; Appian, vii, 59. 

31. Ibid., viii, 134. 

32. Livy, xxxix, 51. 

CHAPTER IV 

1. Twelv^e Tables, iv', i. 

2. St. Augustine, City of God, vi, 9. 

3. Horace, Satires, i, 8, 35; Miiller-Lyer, F., 
Evolution of Modem Marriage, 55; Cas- 
tiglione, 195; Howard, C., Sex Worship, 
65, 79; Etjc. Brit., iith ed., XVII, 467; 
XXI, 345- 

4. Pliny, xxviii, 19. 

5. Livy, xxiii, 31. 

6. Virgil, Georgies, ii, 419; Horace, Odes, 
i, 1.25. 

7. Frazer, Magic Art, II, 190; the derivation 
is questioned by Fowler, W. W., Roman 
Festivals of the Republic, 99. 

8. V’irgil, Aeneid, vii, 761; Ovid, Fasti, vi, 
753; Metamorphoses, xv, 497; Strabo, v, 
3.12; Pliny, XXX, 12-13; Frazer, Magic 
Art, I, II. 

9. Boissier, G., La religion romaine, I, 27. 

10. Livy, V, 21-2; vi, 29; Coulanges, 199. 

11. Ovid, Metam., xv, 626. 

12. Livy, viii, 15; Lanciani, R., Ancient 
Rome, 143. 

13. Fowler, W. W., Religious Experience of 
the Roman People, 337. 

14. Mommsen, III, n. 

15. Cicero, Pro Arabia, 4; Fowler, op. cit., 
30. The derivation is not certain; Cicero 
gives another in De natiira deonim, ii, 28. 

16. Reinach, S., Apollo, 109. 

17. Livy, vii, 5. 

18. Pliny, xxviii, 10. 

19. Harrison, J., Prolegomena to the Study 
of Greek Religion, 35. 

20. Plautus, Citrcidio, 33-8. 

21. Ovid, Fasti, iii, 523. 

23. Hovv^ard, 66. 

24. Athenaeus, xiv, 44. 

2$. Westermarck, E., Origin and Develop- 
ment of the Moral Ideas, I, 430; Cicero, 
Pro Caelio, 20. 

26. Brittain, A., Roman Women, 135-6. 

27. Coulanges, 63. 

28. Plutarch, “Numa and Lycurgus.” 



CHAP. V) 

29. Gellius, X, 23. 

30. Abbott, F., Common People of Ancient 
Rome, 87. 

31. Catullus, PoCTZj', XXV. 

32. PHny, xxxiii, 16. 

33. Fowler, W. W., Social Life at Rome, 
50-1, 270. 

34. Polybius, xxxi, 26. 

35. Ibid., vi, 56. 

36. Cf. Appian, vi, passim. 

37. Polybius, vi, 58. 

38. Plutarch, Quaestiones Romanae, 59. 

39. Livy, iii, 38. 

40. Heine, H., Memoirs, I, 12. 

41. Thompson, Sir E., Greek and Latin 
Paleography, 5. 

42. Schlegel, A. W., Lectures on Draitiatic 
Art and Literature, 202. 

43. Livy, vii, 2; Bieber, N., History of the 
Greek and Roman Theater, 307. 

44. In Duff, J., Literary History of Rome, 
130. 

45. Castiglione, 196. 

46. Lanciani, R., Ancient Rome, 53. 

47. Glover, T. R., Conflict of Religions in 
the Early Roman Empire, 13; Fried- 
lander, L., Rotnan Life and Manners un- 
der the Early Empire, III, 141. 

48. Twelve Tables, x, 9. 

49. Pliny, xxix, 6 . 

50. Frank, Economic Survey, I, 12; CAH, 
VII, 417; for the contrary cf. Mommsen, 
History, I, 193, 238. 

51. Pliny, xviii, 3. 

52. Virgil, Georgies, i, 299. 

53- Guhl, E., and Koner, W., Life of the 
Greeks atid Romaats, 503. 

54. Cato, de agri ctdtura, viii; Varro, Renim 
ruslicanim libri tres, pref. 

55- Cicero, Letters, vii, i. 

56. Phny, xxxiii, 13. 

57- CAH, VIII, 345. 

58. Mommsen, History, III, 75. 

59. CAH, X, 395; Frank, Econotnic History 
of Rome, 340. For other comparative 
prices cf. ibid., 66. 

60. Twelve Tables, viii, 18; Tacitus, Annals, 
vi, 16. 

6 1. Livy, vii, 19-21, 42. 

62. Paul-Louis, 1 18. 

63. Frank, Economic History, 119; for a 
contrary view cf. Ward, C. O., The 
Aticient Lotvly, 208-9. 

64. Livy, viii, 12; Dionysius of Halicarnas- 
sus, ix, 43. 

65- iVIommsen, History, I, 248-9; Paul-Louis, 
47- 

77% between 200 and 150 b.c.— Frank, 
Economic Survey, I, 146. 


683 

67. Ibid., 41; CAH, VIII, 344; Paul-Louis, 
102; Mommsen, History, ll, 55. 

68. Pliny, xxxvi, 24. 

69. Enc. Brit., XIX, 466. 

70. Rickard, T., Man and Metals, I, 280. 

71. Twelve Tables, x, 4. 

72. E.g. in Plautus’ Captives, 998. 

73. Lucian, Dialogues of the Dead, xxv. 

CHAPTER V 

1. Livy, iv', 302. 

2. Plutarch, “Flamininus.” 

3. Livy, xliv, 22. 

4. Appian, vi, 9-10; Mommsen. History, 
III, 220. 

5. Livy, xxxix, 7; Mommsen, 201. 

6. Polybius, v'i, 17. 

7. Davis, W. S., Influence of Wealth in 
Imperial Rome, 74, 77; Mommsen, III, 

8. Polybius, xxxi, 25; Mommsen, III, 127; 
Sellar, W. Y., Roman Poets of the Re- 
public, 234. 

9. Mommsen, III, 40. 

10. Polybius, xxxi, 25. 

11. Guhl, 490. 

12. Plutarch, “Cato the Elder.” 

13. Livy, x.xxiv, i. 

14. Brittain, 95. 

15. Polybius, XXX, 14. 

16. Mommsen, III, 21, 127. 

17. Ibid., 44, 294, 301-2. 

18. CAH, VIII. 359. 

19. Plutarch, “Marcellus.” 

20. Anderson, 137. 

21. Cicero, De divinatione, ii, 24.52. 

22. Polybius, vi, 56. 

23. Livy, xxxix, 8. 

24. Cicero, De re publica, ii, 19. 

24a. Horace, Epistles, ii, 1.156. 

25. Cicero, De senectute, viii, 26. 

26. Cf. Bk. II of the Republic. 

27. Appian, vd, 9.53. 

28. Ennius, Telatno, frag, in Duff, 141. 

29. Cicero, De div., ii, 50. 

30. Ennius, frag, in Gellius, xii, 4. 

31. Ennius in Cicero, Disp. Tusc., ii, i.i. 

32. Collins, W. L., Plautus and Terence, 
33-4; Matthews, B., Development of the 
Drama, 98. 

33. Cicero, De re publica, iv% 10. 

34. Collins, 45. 

35. Plautus, Amphitryon, iii, 2, 4. 

36. Batiffol, L., Century of the Renaissance, 
164. 

37. Suetonius, On Poets, “Terence,” ii. 

38. Terence, Heauton Timoroumenos, pro- 
logue. 


NOTES 



CAESAR AND CHRIST 


(chap. VI 


684 

39. Terence, Adelphi, prologue. 

40. Suetonius, 1 . c. 

41. Plutarch, Moralia, 198E, 199C. 

42. Phny, vii, 28. 

43. Livy, xxxix, 42; Plutarch, “Cato the 
Elder.” 

44. Fowler, Social Life, 191. 

45. Pliny, viii, n. 

46. Plutarch, 1 . c. 

47. Ibid., Phny, xxix, 7. 

48. Appian, vih, 14. 

49. Strabo, xvii, 3.15. 

CHAPTER VI 

1. Mommsen, History, III, 306. 

2. Livy, xh, 28; xlv, 34. 

3. Ibid., xxxix, 29. 

4. Heitland, W., Agricola, idi; Ward, I, 
121. 

5. Dio Cassius, xxxiv, frag, u, 23; Livy, 
Epitome of Book xc. 

6. Plutarch, “Tiberius Gracchus.” 

7. Ibid. 

8. Appian, Civil Wars, i, i. 

9. Phny, xxxiii, 14. 

10. Appian, Civil Wars, i, 3. 

11. Juhus Phihppus in Cicero, De off., h, 21. 

12. Appian, Civil Wars, i, 4. 

13. Plutarch, “Marius.” 

14. Sallust, Jugurthine War, xih, xx-xxvih. 

15. Plutarch, 1 . c. 

16. Ibid. 

17. Plutarch, “Syha.” 

18. Sallust, xcv. 

19. Ibid., xcvi. 

20. Mommsen, IV, 142. 

21. Appian, Civil Wars, i, 8. 

12. Plutarch, 1 . c. 

23. Ibid. 

24. Ibid. 

CHAPTER Vn 

1. Plutarch, “Caesar.” 

2. Davis, 13-14. 

3. Cicero, Ad Atticum, iv, 15. 

4. Plutarch, “Pompey.” 

5. Cicero, Ad Quintum, h, 5. 

6. Cicero, Letters, hi, 29. 

7. Cicero, Ad Quintum, hi, 2. 

8. Mommsen, V, 349. 

9. Plutarch, “Cicero.” 

10. Cicero, / In Verrem, 13. 

11. Frank, Economic History, 295. 

12. Mommsen, IV, 173. 

13. Frank, 289. 

14. Cicero, De off., i, 8. 

15. Plutarch, 1 . c. 
of History, 238. 


16. Nepos, “Atticus.” 

17. Plutarch, “LucuUus.” 

18. Frank, Economic Survey, I, 354. 

19. Maciohms, Saturnalia, ni, 13. 

20. Varro, hi, 16; Cicero, Letters, ix, 18; 
Mommsen, V, 387. 

22. Cicero, Letters, vh, 26. 

23. Phny, xxxvi, 24. 

24. L. c. 

25. Historiae Augustae, “Alex. Severus,” 33; 
Livy, xxxix, 8f ; Mommsen, V, 384; Ward, 
I, 406. 

26. In Boissier, G., Cicero and His Friends, 
164. 

27. Cicero, Fro Caelio. 

28. Plutarch, “Cato the Younger.” 

29. Cicero, Ad Atticum, h, i; Plutarch, 1 . c., 
and “Phocien.” 

30. Appian, Roman History, vi, 16. 

31. Plutarch, “Crassus.” 

32. Ibid. 

33. Plutarch, “Sertorius.” 

34. Plutarch, “Pompey.” 

35. Cicero, De lege Manilla, vii, 18-19. 

36. Cicero, Pro Caelio, 16. 

37. Cicero, Pro Sexto Roscio. 

38. Sahust, The War of Catiline, xv. 

39. Ibid.; Plutarch, “Cicero.” 

40. Haskell, H., The New Deal in Old 
Rome, 125. 

41. Sahust, Catiline, xx, 7-13. 

42. Cicero, 111 In Catilinam, vu. 

43. Haskell, 167. 

44. Sallust, xxxhi, i. 

45. Cicero, op. cit., vhi. 

46. Ibid., i. 

47. Cicero, In Pisonem, vi-vh. 

CHAPTER VIII 

1. Lucretius, De rerum nature, hi, 1053!; 
tr. W. D. Rouse. 

2. Ibid., iv, 1045-71. 

3. Mommsen, IV, 207. 

4. Fowler, Religious Experience of the 
Roman People, 391. 

5. Lucretius, i, 1-40. 

6. Ibid., i, loi. 

7. V, 1202. 

8. I, 73. 

9 - II, 646. 

10. II, 1090. 

11. VI, 35. 

12. I, 430. 

13. n, 312. 

14. IV, 834. 

15. V, 419. 

16. V, 837. 

17. II, 8. 



NOTES 


685 


CHAP. IX) 


18. V, 1 1 16. 

19. II, 29. 

20. IV, 1052. 

21. V, 925!. 

22. II, 79. 

23. II, 1148. 

24. II, 576. 

25. Shotwell, Introduction, 221. 

25a. Appian, ii, 2. 

26. Lucretius, v, 564. 

27. VI, 1093. 

28. In Eusebius, Chronicles in Hadzsits, G., 
Lucretius and His Influence, 5. 

29. Sellar, Poets of the Republic, 277. 

30. Voltaire, Lettres de Menmiius d Ciceron, 
in Hadzsits, 327. 

31. Apuleius, Apology, in Sellar, 411. 

32. Catullus, Poems, li. 

33. Id., ii. 

34. V. 

35. XL 

36. LXXXV. 

37. LXX. 

38. CL 

39- XXXI. 

40. xxxvin. 

41. XCVIII. 

42. Varro, pref. 

43. Ibid., ii, 10. 

44. St. Augustine, City of God, iv, 27. 

45- Ibid., vii, y. 

46. Sallust, Jug. TCar, Ixxxv. 

46a. Gellius, xvii, 18. i. 

46b. Pliny, xiv, 17. 

47. In VVeise, O., Language and Character of 
the Roman People, 86. 

48. Nepos, “Atticus,” xvi. 

49. Cf. the letter to Trebatius, in Cicero, 
vii, 10. 

50. Cf. the letter to Lentulus in Cicero, i, 
7 with the speech Pro Balbo, 27. 

51. Ad Atticum, vii, i. 

52. Letters, xv, 4, to Cato. 

53. Boissier, Cicero, 84; Frank, Economic 
Survey, I, 395. 

54. Ad Atticutn, i, 18. 

55- Ibid., i, 7. 

56. Pro Archia, vii. 

57- E>e div., i, 2.1; ii, 2.4-5. 

58. De off., ii, 17. 

59. De natura deorum, i, 2, 8. 

60. De div., ii, 12.28. 

61. Academica, ii, 41. 

62. De natura deorum, i, 5. 

63. De div., ii, 47.97. 

63a. De natura deorum, iii, 16. 

64. Ibid., ii, 37. 

65. Ibid., i, i; De legibus, ii, 7; De off., ii, 
72.148. 


66. De legibus, i, 7. 

67. De re publica, i, 2. 

68. Ibid., i, 44. 

69. Ill, 22. 

70. De legibus, i, 15. 

71. De amicitia, xii, 40. 

72. De senectute, xi, 38. 

73. Disp. Tusc., i. 

74. De legibus, i, 2. 

CHAPTER IX 

1. Suetonius, Supplement, i, 3. 

2. Suetonius, “Julius,” 49. 

3. Ibid., 4; Plutarch, “Caesar.” 

4. Suetonius, “Julius,” 52. 

5. Plutarch, “Cato the Younger.” 

6. Quintilian, totitMier, X, 1.114. 

7. Sallust, Catalme, ii. 

8. Appian, Civil Wars, ii, 2. 

9. Ferrero, G., Greatness and Decline of 
Rome, I, 261. 

10. Boissier, Tacitus, ziyf. 

12. Mommsen, V, 132. 

13. Caesar, Gallic War, i, 44. 

14. Mommsen, V, 34. 

15. Ibid., 38. 

16. Cicero, 1. c., 81. 

17. Mommsen, V, too. 

18. Plutarch, “Pompey,” “Crassus,” “Cato 
the Younger.” 

19. Homo, L., Roman Political Institutions, 
184; Mommsen, V, 166. 

20. Ibid., 385. 

21. Appian, Civil Wars, ii, 3. 

22. Cicero, Pro Sextio, 35; Mommsen, V, 
io8f, 370; Ferrero, I, 313; Boissier, Ci- 
cero, 215; Fowler, Social Life, 58. 

23. Dio Cassius, xl, 57. 

24. Plato, Republic, 562!. 

25. Suetonius, “Julius,” 77. 

26. Appian, Civil Wars, ii, 5; Ferrero, II, 187. 

27. Suetonius, “Julius,” 32; Appian, l.c. 

28. Syme, 89. 

29. Cicero ad Atticum, viS, 16. 

30. Ferrero, II, 212. 

31. Cicero, Letters, xvi, 12, to Tiro, 49 b.c. 

32. Cf., e.g., De bello civile, i, 43-52. 

33. Ibid., i, 53; Appian, ii, 15. 

34. Caesar, Bello civile, iii, i. 

35. Plutarch, “Caesar”; Appian, ii, 8. 

36. Caesar, iii, 10. 

37. Ibid., iii, 53. 

38. Cicero, Letters, vii, 3 to Marcus iMarius, 
46 B.C.; ad Atticum, xi, 6. 

39. Appian, ii, 10. 

40. Plutarch, “Pompey.” 

41. Plutarch, “Marcus Brutus.” 

42. Caesar, iii, 88. 



686 


CAESAR AND CHRIST 


(chap. X 


43. Plutarch, “Pompey.” 

44. Appian, ii, 13. 

45. MahafFy, J., Silver Age of the Greek 
World, 199. 

46. CAH, X, 37; Buchan, Augustus, 117. 

47. Suetonius, “Julius,” 52. 

48. Ibid. 

49. Plutarch, “Caesar.” 

50. Dio Cassius, xlii, 49. 

51. Appian, ii, 13. 

52. Suetonius, “Julius,” 80. 

53. Pliny, xxviii, 2. 

55. Frank, Economic History, 351. 

56. Plutarch, “Caesar.” 

57. Cicero Pro Marcello, 6-10. 

58. Cf. ad Familiares, viii, 14, 22-5; ix, ii. 

59. In Cicero, ad Atticum, xiv, i. 

60. Dio Cassius, ii, 44. 

61. Plutarch, “Brutus.” 

62. Appian, ii, 16. 

63. Plutarch, l.c. 

64. From a doubtful letter of Brutus in 
Boissier, Cicero and His Friends, 334. 

65. Cicero, ad Atticum, v, 21; vi, 1-9. 

66. Appian, ii, 16. 

67. Suetonius, “Julius,” 79. 

68. Ibid., 81-87; Plutarch, “Caesar”; Appian, 
ii, 16-21. 

69. Suetonius, 82. 

70. Appian, l.c. 

CHAPTER X 

1. Ferrero, II, 226. 

2. Boissier, Cicero, 192. 

3. Appian, Civil Wars, ii, 2; Dio, xlv, 2. 

4. Appian, iv, ii. 

5. Ibid., 2-6; Plutarch, “Antony.” 

6. Brutus to Cicero, ad Familiares, xi, 20. 

7. Plutarch, “Cicero.” 

8. Appian, iv, 4; Plutarch, “Antony.” 

9. Philo, Quod onmis probus, 118-20; Ap- 
pian, iv, 8-10. 

10. Plutarch, “Antony”; Appian, v, i. 

11. Ibid.; Athenaeus, iv, 29. 

13. CAH, X, 79. 

14. Suetonius, 17. Rostovtzeff, Social and 
Economic History of the Roman Em- 
pire, 29, thinks the will a forgery; CAH, 
X, 97, accepts it as genuine. 

15. Dio, li, 35. 

16. Ibid., 6. 

17. Ibid. 

18. Ibid., Suetonius, 17. 

CHAPTER XI 

1. Suetonius, “Augustus,” 33. 

2. Dio, hv, 17. 

3. Ibid., Iv, 4. 


4. Suetonius, 40. 

5. Gibbon, E., Decline and Fall of the 
Roman Empire, ed. Bury, I, 65. 

6. Suetonius, 23; Dio, Ivi, 17. 

7. Plutarch, Moralia, 207D. 

8. Charlesworth, M., Trade Routes and 
Commerce of the Roman Empire, 8. 

9. Suetonius, 41. 

9a. Dio, liv, 18. 

9b. Suetonius, 28. 

10. Ibid., 42. 

12. Augustus, Res gestae, iii, 21. 

13. Dio, Iv, 25. 

14. Suetonius, 58. 

16. Pliny, xiv, 5. 

18. Cf. Himes, N., Medical History of Con- 
traception, 85! and 188. 

19. Dio, liv, 19. 

20. Tacitus, Annals, xv, 19. 

21. Ibid., iii, 25. 

22. Horace, Odes, iii, 24. 

23. Davis, Infljience of Wealth, 304. 

24. Gellius, X, 2.2. 

25. Ibid. 

26. Dio, Ivi, I. 

27. Ovid, Ars Amatoria, 6-ij. 

28. Augustus, Res gestae, ii, 10. 

29. Buchan, 286. 

30. Suetonius, 76-83. 

31. Ibid., 81; Dio, Iii, 30. 

32. Suetonius, 76. 

33. Ibid., 84. 

34. Ibid., 90-2. 

35. Ferrero, IV, 175. 

36. Plutarch, Moralia, 207C. 

37. Suetonius, 53. 

38. Dio, Ivii, 2. 

39. Suetonius, 64. 

40. jMacrobius, Saturnalia, ii, 5, ad finem: “I 
never take on a passenger unless the 
vessel is already full.” 

41. Seneca, Moral Essays, III, vi, 32.1. 

42. Suetonius, 99. 

CHAPTER Xn 

1. Macrobius, ii, 4. 

2. Horace, Epistles, ii, 1.117. 

3. Juvenal, Satires, i, 2; iii, 9. 

4. Martial, Epigrams, i, 67, 118; Fried- 
lander, III, 37. 

4a. Lanciani, Ancietit Rome, 183. 

5. Ovid., Tristia, i, 1.105. 

6. Tacitus De oratorisbus, 13. 

8. Virgil, Eclogues, i, 46. 

9. Ibid., i, ix. 

10. Suetonius, On Poets, “Virgil,” 9. 

11. Virgil, Georgies, iii, 284 

12. Ibid., i, 145. 



NOTES 


687 


CHAP. XIIl) 

13. II, 490. 

14. In Duff, Literary History of Rome, 455. 

15. Georgies, iii, 46. 

16. Aeneid, vi, 86of; Suetonius, “Virgil,” 31. 

17. Aeneid, ii, 293. 
ik Ibid., iv, 331-61. 

19. VI, 126. 

20. VI, 852. 

21. IV, 508. 

22. Suetonius, 23. 

23. Ibid., 43. 

24. Voltaire, Philosophical Dictionary, art. 
Epic Poetry. 

25. Suetonius, On Poets, “Horace.” 

26. Horace, Odes, iii, 2. 

27. Epodes, ii, 2.41. 

28. Satires, i, i. 

28a. Epistles, i, 16; Rostovtzelf, Social and 
Economic of the Roman Empire, 61. 

29. Horace, Satires, ii, 5. 

30. Ibid., ii, 7.105. 

31. Ibid., 23. 

32. I, i.(^. 

33. Odes, ii, 10. 

34. Satires, i, 1.105. 

35. Ibid., ii, 1. 1. 

36. Odes, iii, 29.12. 

37. Satires, ii, 6.60. 

39. Odes, iii, 16.29. 

40. Epodes, ii, i. 

41. Petronius, Satyricon, 118. 

42. Odes, ii, II. 

43- I, 9- 

44- I- 28. 

45- I, 35- 

46. Ill, 30. 

47. Ars poetica, 139. 

48. Ibid., 343. 

49. Ibid., 102. 

50. Epistles, i, 6.1. 

51. Odes, ii, 3. 

52. Ibid., ii, 10. 

53. Satires, ii, 7.83. 

54. Odes, iii, 3. 

55. Epistles, i, 4.16; cf. i, 17. 

56. Satires, ii, 6.93. 

57. Epistles, ii, 2.55. 

58. Odes, ii, 14. 

59. Satires, i, 1.117. 

60. Epistles, ii, 2.214. 

61. Odes, ii, 17. 

63. Taine, H., Essai sur The Live, i. 

64. Pliny, Natural History, dedication. 

65. Taine, l.c., 10. 

66. E.g., Livy, ii, 48. 

67. E.g., cf. Livy, xlv, 12 with Polybius, 
xxix, 27; or Livy, xxiv, 34 with Polybius, 
viii, 5. 

68. Pliny, Letters, ii, 3. 


69. Tibullus, i, I. 

70. Ibid., i, 6. 

71. I, 3, 10. 

72. Propertius, ii, 34, 57. 

73. Ibid., ii, 6. 

74. I, 8. 

75. Ovdd, Tristia, w, 10. 

76. Ovid, Ars cmiatoria, 157. 

77. Ibid., 99. 

78. Ibid., 171. 

79. Amores, ii, 4. 

80. Ibid., i, i; ii, 18. 

81. II, I. 

82. I, 4. 

83. 11,5- 

84. II, 10. 

85. Ill, 7; ii, 10. 

86. Ars artmtoria, 97. 

90. Retnedia mnoris, 183. 

91. Ibid., 194. 

92. Heroides, iv. 

93. Tristia, ii, 103. 

94. Ex Ponto, iv, 6.41, 

95. Tristia, i, i; iii, 8. 

96. Ibid., iii, 3.15; Ex Ponto, i, 4.47. 

CHAPTER XIII 

1. In Holmes, Architect of the Roman 
Empire, 108. 

2. Suetonius, “Tiberius,” 68. 

3. Ibid., 69. 

4. Tacitus, Annals, i, ii. 

5. Suetonius, 23. 

6 . Dio, Ivii, 18. 

7. Ibid., 6; Suetonius, 30; Tacitus, Annals, 
iv, 6. 

8. Suetonius, 27. 

9. Tacitus, l.c. 

10. Suetonius, 32. 

11. Ferrero, G., Women of the Caesars, 136. 

12. Tacitus, ii, 50. 

13. Ibid., iv, 57. 

14. Dio, Ivii, II. 

15. Ferrero, Women, 140. 

16. Tacitus, iv, 57; Suetonius, 42-4. 

17. CAH, X, 638. 

18. Tacitus, iv, 58. 

. 19. Suetonius, 60. 

20. Tacitus, iv, 70. 

21. Ibid., vi, 50. 

22. Mommsen, T., Provinces of the Roman 
Empire, II, 187. 

23. Josephus, Antiquities, xi.’C, 1.15. 

24. Suetonius, “Gaius,” 50-1. 

25. Ibid. 

26. Dio, lix, 5. 

27. Suetonius, “Gaius,” 29, 32. 

28. Dio, lix, 26. 



688 


CAESAR AND CHRIST 


(chap. XIV 


29. Suetonius, 24. 

30. Ibid. 

31. Seneca Ad Helvicnn, x, 4. 

32. Suetonius, 40. 

33. Ibid., 38. 

34. Ibid., 30. 

35. Dio, lix, 3. 

36. Suetonius, 27. 

37. For a defense of Caligula cf. Balsdon, 
The Emperor Gains, 33 etc. 

39. Dio, lix, 28. 

40. Balsdon, 161. 

41. Ibid., 168. 

42. Dio, lix, 29. 

43. Suetonius, “Claudius,” 29. 

44. Dio, lx, 10. 

45. Suetonius,* 21. 

46. Seneca, Apocolocyntosis, 3. 

47. Tacitus, xii, 53. 

4R Suetonius, 28. 

49. Brittain, 244. 

50. Suetonius, 37; Dio, be, 14. 

51. Suetonius, 50. 

52. Dio, Ix, i8. 

53. Tacitus, xi, 12. 

54. Ibid., 23. 

55. Dio, Ixi, 31. 

56. Ferrero, Women, 226. 

57. Buchan, 247. 

58. Tacitus, xi, 25. 

59. Pliny, Nat. Hist., bt, 117. 

60. Tacitus, xiii, 43. 

61. Dio, bd, 34. 

62. Ibid., 2. 

63. Suetonius, “Nero,” 52. 

64. Dio, l.vi, 3. 

65. Tacitus, .xiii, 4. 

66. Henderson, B., Life and Principate of 
the Emperor Nero, 75. 

67. Tacitus, XV, 48. 

68. Suetonius, 56. 

69. Ibid., 27. 

70. Tacitus, xvi, 18. 

71. Dio, bdi, 15; Ixi, 7; Suetonius, 26. 

72. Dio, Lxii, 14; Tacitus, xiv, 5, adds that 
some writers question the story. 

73. Tacitus, xiv, 10. 

74. Ibid., xiii, 3. 

75. Suetonius, 20. 

76. Ibid., 41; Dio, Iriii, 26. 

77. Suetonius, J2. 
y8. Ibid., ii. 

79. Tacitus, xiv, 60. 

80. CAH, X, 722. 

81. Tacitus, XV, 44. 

82. Ibid., xvi, 6; Suetonius, 23. 

83. Dio, lxii, 27; Suetonius, 27. 

84. Tacitus, xvi, 18. 

83. Suetonius, 22. 


86. Ibid. 

87. Dio, bciii, 23. 

88. Suetonius, 43. 

89. Ibid., 37. 

90. Suetonius, “Galba,” 23. 

91. Tacitus, Histories, i, 49, 

92. Suetonius, “Otho,” 5, 

93. Tacitus, Hist., iii, 67. 

94. Suetonius, “Vitellius,” 17. 

95. Suetonius, “Vespasian,” 13, 

96. Ibid., 16. 

97. Dio, Ixv, 14. 

98. Suetonius, 18. 

99. Ibid., 21. 

too. Tacitus, Hist., ii, 2. 
loi. Suetonius, 23-4. 
t02. Suetonius, “Titus,” 8. 

103. Suetonius, “Domitian,” 18. 

104. Dio, Ixvi, 26. 

105. Suetonius, 22; Dio, Lxvii, 6. 

106. Frank, Economic Survey, V, 56. 

107. Dio, lxvii, 14. 

108. Suetonius, to. 

CHAPTER XIV 

1. Lucan, Pharsalia, ii, 67. 

2. Ibid., i, 128. 

3. Petronius, Epigrams, frag. 22 in Robert- 
son, J. AT, Short History of Free- 
thought, I, 2 1 1. 

4. Petronius, Satyricon, n. 

5. Ibid., 48. 

6. 71. 

7. 33, 40, 47. 

8. 74. 

9. Seneca in Boissier, G., La religion ro- 
maine, II, 104. 

10. Tacitus, Annals, xiv, 39; xvi, 34. 

It. Lucian, Icaromenippus, 4. 

12. Seneca, Episndae Morales, xii; Moral 
Essays, III, vii, n.i, 

13. Momot, Source Book, tpoi. 

14. Quintilian, Institutes, x, 1.125. 

13. Dio, lxii, 2. 

r6. Friedlander, III, 238. 

17. Tacitus, Annals, xiii, 42. 

18. Seneca, De vita beata, xvii-x\uii. 

19. Davis, Influence of Wealth, 154. 

20. Seneca, Epist. xv. 

21. De vita beata, xviii. 

22. De dementia, i, 3. 

24. Epist., vii. 

Tacitus, Annals, xiii, 2. 

27. Boissier, Tacitus, it. 

28. Seneca, Epist., Lxxvi. 

30. Seneca, Epist., Ixxv. 

31. Ibid., vii. 

32. XXVI. 



NOTES 


689 


CHAP. XV) 

33. De providentia, ii, 6. 

34. Epist., xli. 

36. De providentia, v, 8. 

37. Epist., xxxi. 

38. Ibid., cii; ad Marciam, xxiv, 3. 

39. In Henderson, Nero, 309. 

40. Epist., Ixxii and iii. 

41. Ibid., Ixxii. 

44. XXXIII. 

45. De brevitate vitae, xiv. 

46. Epist., bdx. 

47. Ibid., ii. 

48. VII; XXV. 

49. XXIII. 

50. LXX. 

$1. De ira, v, 15. 

52. Epist., Iviii. 

53. Ibid., Ixi. 

54. De ira, ii, 34. 

55. Epist., i, Ixi. 

56. Tertullian, De aninta, xx. 

57. In Acton, Lord, History of Freedom, 25. 

58. Epist., x.xxi. 

59. Gummere, R. M., Seneca the Philoso- 
pher, 131. 

60. Seneca, Medea, 364. 

di. Quaestiones naturales, vii, 30-33. 

62. Ibid., vii, 25, 30. 

63. Pliny, xxxvi, 15. 

64. Ibid., ii, 5. 

63. Plutarch, “Sertorius.” 

66. Pliny’s Letters, iii, 5. 

67. Pliny, Nat. Hist., iii, 6. 

68. Ibid., ii, 5. 

69. II, 30. 

70. II, 33. 

71. II, 6, 64. 

72. II, 90-92. 

73. II, 63. 

74. XXXIV, 39. 

75. XXXVII, 27. 

76. XIX, 4. 

77. XVIII, 76. 

78. XXV, no. 

79. XXXVIII, 52. 

80. XXVIII, 80. 

81. VII, 5. 

82. XXVIII, 16. 

83. VII, 3. 

84. XXV, 13. 

8j. Castigbone, 214. 

86. Pliny, ii, 5, 117. 

87. XXXIII, 13. 

88. II, 5. 

89. VII, 56. 

90. XXVIII, 7, 

91. VIII, 67. 

92. VII, 13. 

93. XVIII, 78f. 


94. II, 37. 

93. Jones, W. H. S., Malaria and Greek His- 
tory, 6x. 

96. Pliny’s Letters, i, 12. 

97. Castiglione, 237. 

98. Tacitus, Hist., iv, 81; Suetonius, “Ves- 
pasian,” 7. 

99. Dill, Sir S., Roman Society from Nero 
to Marcus Aurelius, 92. 

100. Pliny, Nat. Hist., xxix, 8. 

101. Lucian, “To an Illiterate Book-Fancier,” 
29. 

102. Pliny, xxvi, 7-8; Castiglione, 200; Gar- 
rison, History of Medicine, 106. 

103. Castiglione, 233, 240. 

104. Ibid., 226. 

105. Soranus in Friedlander, I, 171. 

106. Castiglione, 237; Garrison, 118. 

107. Bailey, C., Legacy of Rotne, 291; Wil- 
liams, H. S., History of Science, I, 274. 

108. Pliny, xxix, 3. 

109. Ibid., 8. 

no. Garrison, 119. 
in. Pliny, xxxv, 94. 

III. Ibid., xxix, 5. 

113. Friedlander, I, 180-1. 

1 14. Castiglione, 234; Friedlander, I, 178; 
Duff, J., Literary History of Rome in 
the Silver Age, 121; Pliny, xxviii, 2. 

1 13. Frank, Economic Survey, I, 381. 

1 16. Bailey, 284. 

1 17. Quintilian, vi, pref. 

118. I, 12.17. 

119. I, 10.36. 

120. X, 3.9, 19. 

121. X, 4.1. 

122. II, 12.7. 

123. II, 5.21. 

124. Juvenal, tdi, 82. 

126. Martial, xi, 43, 104. 

127. II, 33. 

128. IV, 49. 

129. I, 16. 

130. X, 4. 

«5‘- IV, 4- 

132. IX, 37. 

»33- 1. 3^; III. 63. 

134. I, 32. 

133. E.g., Lx, 27. 

136. XI, 16. 

137. Ill, 69. 

138. Pliny’s Letters, iii, 21. 

CHAPTER XV 

1. Columella, De re rustica, i, 3.12. 

2. In Davis, Influence of Wealth, 144. 

3. Pliny, Nat. Hist., xviii, 4; Heitland, 224; 
Frank, Economic Survey, V, 173. 



CAESAR AND CHRIST 


(chap. XVI 


690 

4. Columella, iii, 3. 

5. Strabo, v, 4.3. 

6. Frank, V, 158. 

7. Pliny, XV, 68-83. 
k Columella, iii, 8. 

9. Rostovtzeff, Roman Empire, 182-3. 

10. Suetonius, “Domitian,” 7. 
n. Cato, De agri cultura, 144. 

12. Pliny, xix, 2. 

13. Paul-Louis, 274-6. 

14. Tacitus, Agricola, 12. 

15. Pliny, ii, 108-9. 

15a. Ammianus Marcellinus, xxiii, 4.15. 

16. Encyclopaedia Britatmica, V, 868. 

17. Paul-Louis, 287. 
ik Frank, V, 229. 

19. Rostovtzeff, Roman Empire, 252. 

20. Haskell, H. J., New Deal in Old Rome, 
24-6. 

21. Scott, S. P., Civil Law, Fragments of 
Ulpian in Justinian, Digest, iii, 24. 

22. Friedlander, I, 289-91. 

23. Gibbon, Everyman Lib. ed., 1, 50; Bailey, 
C., Legacy of Rome, 158. 

24. Seneca Ad Helviam, vi. 

25. Plutarch, Moralia, “On Exile,” 604A. 

26. Halliday, W. R., Pagan Background of 
Early Christianity, 88. 

27. Juvenal, xiv, 287. 

29. Athenaeus, ii, 239. 

30. Josephus, Life, p. 511. 

31. Mommsen, Provinces, II, 278. 

32. Friedlander, I, 286. 

33. Pliny, xix, i, 4. 

34. Ibid., ii, 57. 

35. Cf. the crane pictured on the tomb of 
the Haterii in the Lateran Museum, 
Rome, in Wickhoff, E., Roman Art, p. 
50; cf. also Gest, 60, and Bailey, 462. 

36. Reid, Municipalities, 28. 

37. Gest, 1 10-13 1. 

3k Pliny, xxxvi, 24. 

39. Bailey, 290. 

40. Frontinus, Stratagems, iii, i. 

41. Frontinus, Aqueducts, ii, 73. 

42. Ibid., i, 16. 

43. In Friedlander, I, 13. 

44. Carter, T. F., Invention of Printing, 86; 
Gibbon, Everyman ed., I, 55. 

45. Tam, W. W., Hellenistic Civilization, 
206. 

46. CAH, X, 417. 

47. Strabo, xvii, 1.3. 

48. Pliny, vi, 26, computes Rome’s annual 
payment to India at 550,000,000 sesterces; 
but this is probably an exaggeration, for 
elsewhere (xii, 41) he estimates the 
yearly loss of Rome to India, China, and 
Arabia at 100,000,000 sesterces each. 


49. Halliday, 97. 

50. Tacitus, Annals, vi, 16-17; Suetonius, 
“Tiberius,” 48; Davis, Influence of 
Wealth, I. Renan, in Lectures on the 
Influence of Rome 071 Christianity, 25, 
and The Apostles, 170, compares Ti- 
berius’ relief measures to the Credit 
Foncier of France in 1852; and Haskell 
compares the simation with the “easy 
money” period in the United States, 
1923-9, the crisis of 1929, and the Re- 
constmction Finance Corporation (The 
New Deal in Old Rome, 183, i88). 

51. Ovid, Fasti, i, 191. 

52. In Toynbee, A., Study of History, I, 
4in. 

53. Davis, 242. 

54. Beard, M., History of the Business Man, 
47- 

55. Athenaeus, vi, 104. 

56. Seneca De dementia, i, 24. 

56a. Sandys, Sir J., Companion to Latin 
Studies, 354. 

57. Pliny, vii, 40. 

58. Friedlander, II, 221. 

59. Boissier, La religion romame, II, 330. 

59a. Seneca De ira, iii, 3. 

60. Juvenal, vi, 474. 

61. Ovid, Ars amatoria, 235; Amores, i, 14. 

62. In Holmes, Architect of the Roman Etn- 
pire, 132. 

63. Dill, 116. 

64. Statius, Silvae, ii, 6. 

65. Seneca, Epist., xlvii, 13. 

66. Dill, 1 17. 

68. Rostovtzeff, Roman Empire, 105; Reid, 
3D. 521- 

69. Toutain, 304. 

70. Frank, Economic History, 280. 

71. Frank, Economic Survey, V, 235. 

72. Petronius, 44. 

73. Rostovtzeff, 172; Declareuil, J., Rome 
the Law-Giver, 269. 

74. Pliny, xiii, 23. 

CHAPTER XVT 

1. Seneca in Friedlander, II, 321. 

2. Livy, x.xiv, 9; Pliny’s Letters, viii, 17; 
Tacitus, Annals, i, 70. 

3. Strabo, v, 3.8. 

4. Juvenal, iii, 235-244. 

5. Ibid., V, 268. 

6. IVIandal, cxvii, 7. 

7. Friedlander, I, 5, 

8. Pliny, xxxv^, 45. 

9. Friedlander, II, 317, 330. 

10. Mau, A., Pompeii, 231; Rostovtzeff, Ro- 
man Empire, 135; Gest, 96. 



NOTES 


691 


CHAP. XVIl) 

11. Vitruvius, De architectura, ii, 21. 

12. Seneca, Epist., cxxii. 

13. Juvenal, iii, 223. 

14. Pliny’s Letters, ii, 17; v, 6. 

15. Suetonius, “Nero,” 39. 

16. In Boissier, Rome and Pompeii, 119. 

17. Pliny, Nat. Hist., xxxiii, 45. 

18. Boissier, Tacitus, 223. 

i8a. N. Y. Times, Apr. 27, 1943. 

19. Mau, 414. 

20. Pliny, XXXV, 66; Strabo, xvi, 25. 

21. Winckelmann, J., History of Ancient 
An, II, 312. 

22. Reid, 278. 

23. Cf. Strong, Art in Ancient Rome, II, 
fig. 341. 

24. Valerius Maximus, Factorum et dic- 
torum, viii, 14. 

23. Pliny, XXXV, 37. 

26. Cf. Maiuri, A., Les fresques de Potnpeii, 
Table XXXIII. 

27. Cf. Rostovtzeff, Mystic Italy, passim. 

27a. Pliny, XXXV, 40. 

CHAPTER XVn 

1. Juvenal, v, 141. 

2. Petronius in Henderson, Nero, 326. 

3. Seneca Ad Marciam, xix, 2. 

4. Juvenal, vi, 367. 

5. Friedlander, I, 238. 

6. Cf . Pliny, xxiv, 1 1 : “They say that if the 
male organ is rubbed with [oil or gum 
of] cedar just before coitus, it will pre- 
vent impregnation,” Cf. also Himes, 85!, 
186. 

7. Juvenal, vi, 592. 

10. Gatteschi, G., Restauri della Roma lm~ 
periale, 64. 

11. Gibbon, I, 42; Friedlander, I, 17; Sandys, 
355-7; Davis, 195; Paul-Louis, 15, 227. 

12. Tacitus, Annals, xiii, 27. 

13. Vogelstein, H., Rome, 10. 

14. Cicero, Pro L. Flacco, 28. 

15. Edersheim, A., Life and Times of Jesus 
the Messiah, I, 67. 

16. Tacitus, Annals, ii, 85; Suetonius, “Ti- 
berius,” 36. 

17. Dio, Ivii, 18; Schiirer, History of the 
Jewish People, Div. II, Vol. II, 234. 

18. Vogelstein, 17. 

19. Ibid., 31, 33; Renan, Lectures, 50. 

20. Tacitus, Annals, ii, 85; Ammanianus, M., 
xxii, 5. 

21. Dm, 83-4. 

22. Dio, lx, 33. 

23. Martial, vii, 30. 

24. Juvenal, iii, 62. 

25. In Bailey, 143. 


26. Tacitus, xiv, 42, 60. 

27. Juvenal, xiv, 44. 

28. Gellius, xii, i. 

29. Enc. Brit., X, 10. 

30. Horace, Satires, i, 6.75. 

31. Pliny’s Letters, ii, 3. 

32. Petronius, i. 

33. Pliny’s Letters, iv, 3. 

34. Ovid, Ars amatoria, 98. 

35. Juv., k, 22. 

36. Minucius Felix, Octavius, 67; TertuUian, 
Apology, 15. 

37. Horaces, Epodes, xi. 

38. Martial, viii, 44; xi, 70, 88, etc.; Juv., ii, 
vi, ix. 

39. In Friedlander, I, 234. 

40. Seneca the Elder, Controversiae, in 
Friedlander, I, 241. 

41. Seneca, Ad Helviatsi, xvi, 3; Ad Mar- 
ciam, xxiv, 3. 

42. Ovid, Amores, i, 8.43; iii, 4.37. 

43. Friedlander, I, 241. 

44. Juv., vi, 228. 

45. Ibid., 281. 

46. I, 22. 

47. Boissier, La religion romaine, II, 197. 

48. Juv., vi, 248. 

49. Martial, De spectaculis, vi. 

50. Statius, Silvae, i, 6. 

51. Seneca, Moral Essays, i, 94. 

52. Ovid, Ars amatoria, 113. 

53. Martial, x, 35. 

54. Ibid., i, 14. 

55. Tacitus, Annals, xvi, 10. 

56. Friedlander, I, 265. 

57. Tacitus, xiv, 5. 

58. Martial, vi, 57. 

59. Catullus, Ixxxvi. 

60. Ovid, Ars, 158; Kohler, K., History of 
Costume, 118; Pfuhl, E., Masterpieces of 
Greek Drawing, fig. 117. 

61. Tibullus, i, 8. 

62. Juv., vi, 502. 

63. Pliny, xxviii, 12. 

64. Guhl and Konar, 498. 

65. Martial, ix, 37. 

66. Ovid, Ars, 160. 

67. Pliny, ix, 63. 

68. Ibid., xxxviii, 12. 

69. IX, 58. 

70. Friedlander, II, 181. 

71. Pliny, xxxiii, 18. 

72. Seneca, Epist., IxxxvL 

73. Pliny, viii, 74. 

74. Quintilian, vi, 3. 

75. Galen in Friedlander, II, 227. The re- 
mainder of this chapter is particularly 
indebted to Friedlander’s devoted ac- 
cumulation of Roman mores. 



692 

76. Juv., vii, 178. 

77. Jones, H. S., Companion to Roman His- 
tory, 1 16; Friedlander, I, 12. 

78. Seneca, Epist., Ixxxvi. 

79. Ker, W. C., in Martial, I, 2440. 

80. Gardiner, E. N., Athletics of the An- 
cient World, 230. 

81. Pliny, xxviii, 51. 

82. Journal of the American Medical Asso- 
ciation, Aug. I, 19^, 1089. 

83. Ovid, Ars, 165; Tristia, ii, 477-80. 

84. Pliny, viii, 51, 77. 

85. Ibid., ix, 30, 31. 

86. Ibid., 39. 

87. VIII, 82. 

88. VIII, 77. 

89. Seneca Ad Helviam, x, 9. 

90. Ibid., 3. 

91. Sandys, 502. 

92. Mantzius, K., History of Theatrical Art, 
I, 217. 

93. Suetonius, “Vespasian,” 19. 

94. Mantzius, I, 218. 

95. Boissier, La rAigion romaine, II, 215. 

96. Cicero Pro Murena, 6. 

97. Lang, P. N., Music in Western Civiliza- 
tion, 35. 

98. Ammianus, xiv, 6. 

99. Martial, v, 78. 

100. Ammianus, xiv, 6. 

10 1. Seneca, Epist., Ixxxv'iii. 

102. Philostrarus, Life of Apollonius of Ty- 
ana, v, 21. 

103. Lang, 33. 

104. Virgil, Aeneid, v, 362!. 

105. Friedlander, II, 30. 

106. Dio, Ixi, 33. 

107. Leck}% W. E., History of European 
Morals, I, 280. 

108. Friedlander, II, 72. 

109. Pliny, viii, 70. 
no. Friedlander, II, 5. 

111. Boissier, Tacitus, 246. 

1 1 2. Martial, De spectaculis, vii. 

1 13. Friedlander, II, 43. 

114. Ibid., 49. 

1 15. Epictetus, Discourses, i, 29.37. 

1 16. Seneca, Epist., Ixx. 

1 17. Friedlander, II, 61. 

1 18. Juv., iii, 36. 

1 19. Pliny II, Panegyricus, xxxiii. 

120. Tacitus, Annals, xiv, 44. 

121. Cicero, Letters, vii, i, to Marcus Marius, 
55 B.C. 

122. Seneca, Epist., vii, xcv. 

123. In St. Augustine, City of God, vi, 10. 

124. Tertullian, Apology, 15. 

125. Juv., xiii, 35. 


(chap, xviii 

126. Abbott, Common People of Ancient 
Rome, 88; Dill, 498. 

127. Friedlander, III, 283. 

CHAPTER XVIII 

1. Bury, J. B., History of the Roman Em- 
pire, 527. 

2. Justinian, Digest, i, i, in Scott, The Civil 
Law. 

3. Gains, Institutes, i, 8. 

4. Maine, Sir H., Ancient Law. This gen- 
eralization has been questioned, but 
seems substantially true. 

5; Justinian, Codex, vii, 16.1. 

6. Gaius, i, 144. 

7. Ibid., 145, 194. 

8. Bucldand, W. W., Textbook of Roman 
Law, 1 13. 

9. Gaius, i, 1 14. 

10. Friedlander, I, 236. 
n. Suetonius, “Vespasian,” 3; Hist. Aug., 
“Antoninus,” 8; “Aurelius,” 29. 

12. Castiglione, 227. 

13. Gaius, commentary, p. 66. 

14. Ibid., p. 64. 

15. Gaius, i, 56. 

16. Davis, Influence of Wealth, 211. 

17. Tacitus, xiv, 41. 

18. Renan, Marc AurMe, 2^. 

19. Ulpina, in Digest, L, 17.32. 

20. Lecky, I, 295. 

21. Gaius, iii, 40-1. 

22. Cicero Ad Eamiliares, viii, 12, 14. 

23. Gaius, ii, 157; iii, 2. 

24. Maine, 117. 

25. Buckland, 64. 

26. Gaius, iii, 189; iv, 4. 

27. Ibid., iv, II. 

28. In Friedlander, I, 165. 

29. Ammianus, xxx, 4. 

30. Ulpian in Digest, L, 13. i. 

31. Quintilian, xii, 1.25. 

32. Pliny’s Letters, v, 14. 

33. Martial, vii, 65. 

34. Pliny’s Letters, ii, 14. 

3J. Tacitus, Annals, xi, 5. 

36. David, 125. 

37. Pliny’s Letters, vi, 33. 

38. Juv., xvi, 42. 

39. Apuleius, Golden Ass, p. 245. 

40. Psalms, cxvi, ii; St. Paul, Epistle to the 
Romans, iii, 4. 

41. In Taylor, H., Cicero, 77. 

42. Quintilian, v, 7.26. 

43. Ibid., vi, 1.47. 

44. Codex Theodosius, ix, 35, in Gibbon, 
II, 120. 

45. Gellius, XX, 1. 13. 


CAESAR AND CHRIST 



NOTES 


693 


CHAP. XIX) 

46. Sallust, Catiline, 55. 

47. Cicero, De re publica, iii, 22; cf. De 
officiis, i, 23; De legibus, i, 15. 

48. Gaius, i, i. 

CHAPTER XIX 

1. Ker, W., in Martial, II, 540. 

2. Dio, bcviii, 13. 

3. Renan, Marc Aurele, 479. 

4. Dio, Ixviii, 15. 

5. Mahaffy, J., Silver Age of the Greek 
World, 307. 

6. In CAH, XI, 201, 855. 

7. Pliny II, Panegyriciis, 50. 

8. Justinian, Digest, xlviii, 19.5. 

9. Bury, Roman Empire, 437. 

10. Brittain, 366. 

ti. WickhofT, 113. 

12. Dio, Ixix, I. 

13. Hist. Aug., “Hadrian,” i, 4. 

14. Ibid, xxvi, r. 

15. Ibid. 

16. XIV, I. 

■ 17. Martial, viii, 70; ix, 26. 

18. Hist. Aug., “Hadrian,” xv, 10. 

19. Ibid., XX, 7. 

20. Henderson, Hadrian, 207. 

2 1 . Eusebius, Ecclesiastical History, iv, 9. 

22. Dio, Ixix, 6. 

23. Pronto, M., Correspondence, a.d. 162; 

11,4. 

24. Hist. Aug., “Hadrian,” x, i. 

25. Winckelmann, I, 327. 

26. Bevan, E. R., House of Seleucus, II, 15. 

27. Hist. Aug., viii, 3. 

29. Simpson, F. M., History of Architectural 
Developjnent, 123. 

30. Dio, Ixix, 4; cf. Henderson, 247. 

31. Dio, Ixix, 8. 

32. Hist. Aug., xxiv, 8. 

33. Merivale, C., History of the Romans 
under the Empire, VIII, 255. 

34. Marcus Aurelius, Meditations, 16. 

35. Hist. Aug., “Antoninus,” iv, 8. 

36. Ibid., viii, i. 

37- IX, 10. 

38. Appian, preface, 7. 

39. Bury, 566. 

40. Renan, The Christian Church, 159. 

41. Renan, Marc Aurele, 2. 

42. Gibbon, I, 76. 

43. Marcus, i, 17. 

44. Ibid., I. 

45- I, 14. 

46. I, 15. 

47- I, 14- 

48. VII, 70. 

49. Hist. Aug., “Marcus,” xxiii, 4. 


50. Friedlander, III, 191. 

51. Watson, P., Marcus Aurelius Antoninus, 
297. 

52. Castiglione, 244. 

53. Galen, in Friedlander, 1, 28. 

54. Dio, Ixii, 14. 

55. Ammianus, xxv, 4. 

56. Williams, H., I, 280. 

57. Renan, Marc, 469. 

58. Marcus, i, 17. 

59. Bury, 547. 

60. Hist. Aug., “Marcus,” xix, 7. 

61. Marcus, x, 10. 

62. Mommsen, Provitices, I, 253. 

CHAPTER XX 

t. Boissier, Tacitus, 2. 

2. Tacims, Agricola, 9. 

3. Pliny’s Letters, ii, i ; vi, 16. 

4. Agricola, end. 

5. Germania, 25, 27. 

6. Armais, iii, 65. 

7. Historiae, i, i. 

8. Agricola, 4. 

9. Germania, 34. 

10. Annals, xvi, 33. 
n. Ibid., iii, 18; vi, 22. 

12. Germania, i, 33. 

13. Agricola, 46. 

14. Annals, vi, 17. 

15. Agricola, 3. 

16. Dialogue on Orators, 40. 

17. Historiae, iii, 12, 64. 
ik Agricola, 18. 

19. Historiae, i, 16. 

20. Ibid. 

21. Juvenal, i, 147. 

23. X, 81. 

24. VI, 652. 

t 5 - 434- 

26. 448. 

27. III. 

28. XIV, 316. 

29. X, 356. 

30. Seneca, De beneficiis, i, 10; Epist., xcvii. 

31. Pliny’s Letters, iii, 19. 

32. V, 3. 

33. 8. 

34- I. 17- 

35. VI, 32. 

36. V, 16. 

37. I, 16. 

38. VII, 19. 

39. VII, 20; IX, 23. 

40. Boissier, Tacitus, 19. 

41. Gibbon, I, 57. 

42. Pliny’s Lerrerr, iii, 12. 

43. Strong, II, fig. 435. 



CAESAR AND CHRIST 


(chap. XXI 


694 

44. Marcus, ii, ii. 

45. VII, 75. 

46. Ibid., 9; iv, 40, 27. 

47. IV, 10. 

48. 11, 17. 

49. Ill, 2. 

50. X, 8. 

51- IV, 23. 

52. II, 17. 

53. VII, 12. 

54. XI, I. 

55. VIII, 10. 

56. IV, 42, 48; viii, 21. 

57. VII, 3. 

58. II, I. 

59. IX, 38; vii, 26. 

60. VI, 48. 

61. 44. 

62. XI, 18. 

63. IV, 49; viii, 61; ii, 5. 

64. IV, 21; viii, 18; ii, 17. 

65. IV, 14, 48; ix, 3. 

66. Dio, Ixxii, 2-3. 

67. Hist. Aug., “Commodus,” 2, 14, 15. 

68. Dio, Ixxiii, 19. 

69. Hist. Aug., 13. 

70. Ibid., 2, 10, II. 

71. Paul-Louis, 215. 

CHAPTER XXI 

1. Pliny, Nat. Hist., iii, 6. 

2. Dill, 239. 

3. Fattorusso, J., Wonders of Italy, 473. 

4. Herodotus, i, 196. 

5. Strabo, V, 1.7. 

6. Varro, Rerum rust., i, 2. 

7. Pliny, iii, 6 . 

8. Strabo, v, 4.5. 

9. Varro, Sat. Men., frag. 44, in Fried- 
lander, I, 338. 

10. Boissier, Cicero, 168. 

11. Seneca, Epist. li. 

12. Strabo, v, 4.3. 

13. Reid, 3. 

14. Dio, Ixvi, 22. 

15. Pliny’s Letters, vi, 16. 

16. Ibid., 20. 

17. Rostovtzeff, Mystic Italy, 52. 

18. Mau, 491; Boissier, Rome and Fompeii, 
430. 

19. Id., La religion romaine, H, 296. 

20. Mau, 226, 148. 

21. Ibid., 16. 

22. Rostovtzeff, Roman Empire, 142; Dill, 
194; Frank, Economic Survey, V, 98; 
Friedlander, II, 254. 

23. CAH, XI, 587; Friedlander, II, 228. 

24. As at Antium, Lanuviuin, Tibur, Aricia. 


CHAPTER XXn 

1. Cicero, II, In V err en, iii, 207. 

2. Tacitus, Annals, xii, 31. 

3. Cicero, Pro lege Manilla, 6. 

4. Plutarch, De reip. ger., 32. 

5. Mommsen, History, II, 205. 

6. Livy, XXV, 29. 

7. Reid, 288. 

8. Toutain, 269. 

9. Bouchier, E., Life and Letters in Roman 
Africa, 73. 

10. St. Augustine, Letters, 185. 

11. Friedlander, I, 312. 

12. Boissier, L’Afrique romaine, 181-2; 
Davis, 200. 

13. Bouchier, 33. 

14. Juvenal, vii, 148. 

15. Apuleius, 41; a fine example of Adling- 
ton’s delectable translation (1566). 

16. Book XI. 

17. Books IV-VI. 

18. Strabo, iii, 4.16. 

19. Ibid., 3.7. 

20. Ibid., 4.16-18. 

21. Buchan, 310. 

22. Gest, 201. 

23. Caesar, Bello Gallico, ii, 30. 

24. Pliny, xxxvui, 5. 

25. Appian, iv, 7. 

26. Strabo, iv, 4.5. 

27. Ibid. 

28. Caesar, v, 34. 

29. Ammianus, xv, 12. 

30. Caesar, vi, 14; Val. Max; ii, 6; Hammer- 
ton, J., Universal History of the World, 

III. 1524. 

31. Caesar, vi, 14. 

33. Arnold, W. P., The Roman System of 
Provincial Administration, 142. 

34. Pliny, xt'iii, 72. 

3j. Frank, Economic Survey, V, i33f. 

36. Pliny, xxxiv, 18. 

37. Ibid., iii, j. 

38. Sidonius Apollinaris, Poems, xxiii, 37. 

40. Jullian, C. Histoire de la Gatde, V, 35n. 

41. In Mommsen, Provinces, I, 118. 

43. See the statement of their case in 
Barnes, H. E., History of Western Civi- 
lization, I, 434. 

44. Alommsen, History, V, 100. 

45. Caesar, V, 12. 

46. Tacitus, Annals, xiv, 29. 

47. Tacitus, Agricola, 21. 

48. Haverfield, F., The Roman Occupation 
of Britain, 213. 

49. Id., The Romanization of Britain, 62; 
Collingwood and Alyres, Roman Britain, 
197; Home, G., Roman London, 93. 



695 


CHAP. XXIIl) 


NOTES 


50. Strabo, iv, 5.2. 

51. CAH, XII, 289. 

52. Time, Mar. 17, 1941. 

53. Tacitus, Germania, 14. 

54. Strabo, vii, 1.2. 

55. Seneca, De ira, v, 10. 

56. Germania, 22. 

57. Sumner, W. G., Folkways, 380. 

58. Ibid., 316. 

59. Germania, 20. 

CHAPTER XXIII 

1. Dio Chrysostom, Or at., vii. 

2. Plutarch, “Demosthenes.” 

3. In Trench, R. C., Plutarch, 40. 

4. Ibid., 41. 

5. In Glover, T. R., Conflict of Religions in 
the Early Roman Empire, 85. 

6. Plutarch, Quaestiones Romanai; De Isise 
et osiride. 

7. Plutarch, Moralia, introd., I, 15. 

E Ibid., 37. 

9. Ibid., vol. II, pp. 123, 128, 131-2, 173- 

10. Ibid., 140B. 

11. De tranq. an., ix, 20. 

12. Dio Chr., Or at., xii. 

13. Epictetus, Discourses, i, 6.26. 

14. Lucian, “Of Pantomime,” 2. 

15. Id., “Demonax,” 57. 

16. Apuleius, book X. 

17. Alciphron, Letters, vi, p. 175. 
ik Dio. Chr., Orat., Ixxii. 

19. Philostratus, Lives of the Sophists, 223!. 

20. Renan, Christian Church, 167. 

21. Our sole source for Demonax is an essay 
uncertainly ascribed to Lucian, and pos- 
sibly colored with fiction. 

22. Lucian, “Peregrinus Proteus.” 

23. Renan, Christian Church, 166. 

24. Lucian, “Demonax,” 55; Epictetus, Dis- 
courses, iii, 22. 

25. Id., frag. I. 

27. I, 12, 21; vi, 25. 

28. IV, I. 

29. I, 24. 

30. II, 5. 

31. I, 2. 

32. Encheiridion, 8. 

33. Discourses, i, 6. 

34. Ibid., 9. 

33- 3. 9; ih 8. 

36. I, 29. 

37. Ill, 24; ii, 6. 

38. I, 16. 

39. I, 18, 19; frag. 43. 

40. Ill, 10. 

41. Frag. 42. 

42. Encheir., 33. 


43. Discourses, ii, 10. 

44. Ill, 12. 

45- *3- 

46. Frags. 34, 94. 

47. Discourses, ii, 16. 

48. I, 9. 

49. Ibid., introd., xxviif. 

30. In Sextus Empiricus, Hypotyposes 
Pyrr., i, 36!, and Gellius, xi, 5.6. For 
details cf. Owen, J., Evenings with the 
Sceptics, I, 323-3. 

31. Sextus, Hyp. Pyrr., ii, 204. 

32. Ill, 29; i, 133-8. 

33. Ill, 210. 

34. Adv. Dogniaticos, i, 148; Hyp. Pyrr., iii, 
9-11. 

33. Ibid., i, 7. 

36. Ibid., i, 8, 23. 

37. HI, 233; Adv. Dogtn., i, 49. 

58. CAH, XII, 449. 

59. Lucian, “Icaromenippus,” 25. 

60. “Zeus Cross-Examined,” 2-18. 

61. “Zeus Tragoedus,” 33. 

62. Dialogues of the Dead, x. 

63. “Hermotimus,” end. 

64. “Charon,” 2. 

63. “Icaromenippus,” 17. 

66. “Charon,” 24. 

67. “Menippus,” 21. 

68. Inge, W., Philosophy of Plotinus, I, 82. 


CHAPTER XXIV 

1. Josephus, Against Apion, ii, p. 480. 

2. Charlesworth, 26; Frank, Economic Sur- 
vey, 11, 330. 

3. Ibid., 337. 

4. 445; Rostovtzeff, Social and Economic 
History of the Hellenistic World, 1288. 

5. Josephus, Wars, ii, 16.4; Frank, V, 245. 

6. Breccia, E., Alexandria ad Aegyptum, 


41. 

8. Dio Chr., xxxn, 69. 

9. In Frank, V, 247; Mommsen, Provinces, 


10. 


II, 177. 

Baron, S. W., Social and 


Religious His- 


tory of the Jews, I, 196-7- 


11. Edersheim, I, 61. 

12. Josephus, Against Apion, ii, p. 489. 

13. Eusebius, Ecclesiastical History, ii, 4. 

14. Graetz, H., History of the Jews, II, iSj. 

15. Philo, Quod Deus sit immutabilis, 12. 

16. Philo, De mundi opiflcio, i, 4; Inge, I, 98. 

17. Philo, De confusione linguarum, 28. 

18. In Sachar, A., History of the Jews, no. 

19. Philo, De vita contemplativa. 

20. Usher, A., History of Mechanical In- 
ventions, 40. 

21. Bailey, 314. 



(chap. XXV 


CAESAR AND CHRIST 


696 

22. Sarton, G., Introduction to the History 
of Science, I, 274. 

23. Ibid., 202; Heath, Sir, T., History of 
Greek Mathematics, II, 306. 

24. Ammianus, xxii, 16-19. 

25. Philostratus, in Friedlander, I, 171. 

26. Bailey, 283. 

27. Sarton, 283. 

28. Himes, 86. 

29. Garrison, 30, no. 

30. Sarton, 282; Castiglione, 202. 

31. Ibid.; Himes, 90. 

32. Haggard, H., Devils, Drugs, and Doc- 
tors, 23. 

33. Galen, On the Natural Faculties, introd., 

XV. 

34. Galen in Thorndike, L., History of 
Magic and Experimental Science, I, J17, 
152. 

35. Ibid., 143. 

36. Williams, I, 278. 

37. In Friedlander, I, 174. 

38. Castiglione, 225. 

39. Thorndike, I, 171. 

40. Strabo, xvi, 4. 

41. Doughty, C., Travels in Arabia Deserta, 

I, 40. 

42. Josephus, Antiquities, xv, 9. 

43. MacGregor, R., Greek Anthology, v, 

44. Tr. by Goldwyn Smith in Symonds, 

J. A., The Greek Poets, 521. 

45. Leslie, S., Greek Anthology, vii, 476. 

46. Ibid., p. 17. 

47. Ibid., ix, 489. 

48. Greek Anthology, ix, 570. 

49. Strabo, xv, 2.23. 

50. Frank, IV, 158. 

51. Rostovtzeff, Roman Empire, 135; CAH, 
II, 634. 

52. Breasted, J. H., Oriental Forerunners of 
Byzantine Painting, pref. 

53. CAH, XI, 638. 

54. Ibid., 646. 

55. In Mahaffy, Silver Age, 211. 

59. Philostratus, Apollonius, iv, 7. 

60. Aelius Aristides, Orat., xvii, 8, in Frank, 
IV, 750. 

61. Philostratus, Lives of the Sophists, i, 25. 

62. Ibid. 

63. Longus, Daphnis and Chloe, ad init., in 
Heliodorus, Greek Romances. 

64. Dio Cassius, Ixx, 4. 

65. Appian, Roman History, xiv, 16. 

66. Ibid. 

67. Pliny, XXV, 3. 

68. Ibid., xxxiii, 14. 

69. Appian, xii, 4. 

70. Ibid., 7. 


71. Ferrero, I, 83. 

72. Arrian, Anabasis of Alexander, i, 12. 

73. Reid, 376. 

74. Williams, I, 255. 

75. Strabo, i, 1.22-3. 

76. Ibid., 3.5. 

77. Dio. Chr., xlvi, 3. 

78. Ibid., x, 21. 

79. In Bigg, C., Neoplatonism, 70. 

80. Ibid., 73. 

81. Dio. Chr., xii, lO; xiii, 28; xiv, 18; xxiii, 7. 

82. Friedlander, III, 299. 

83. Frazer, Adonis, Attis, and Osiris, 157. 

84. Cumont, F., Oriental Religions in the 
Roman Empire, 53. 

85. Ibid., 55. 

86. Frazer, 306; Boissier, La religion ro- 
marne, I, 383; Dill, 549!. 

87. Plutarch, De hide; Dill, 377; HaUiday, 
W., Pagan Background of Early Chris- 
tianity, 240. 

88. Tam, 296; Dill, 582. 

89. Cumont, 41, 93. 

90. Breasted, J., Ancient Times, 660; Wei- 
gall, A., The Paganism in Our Chris- 
tianity, 129, 

91. Dill, 610. 

92. Ibid., 601, 623. 

93. Cumont, 158. 

94. Guignebert, C., Christianity, Past and 
Present, 71. 

9J. Hatch, E., Influence of Greek Ideas upon 
the Christian Church, 283. 

96. Frazer, Adonis, 229; Halliday, 317. 

97. Hatch, 147. 

98. Philo, De vita contemplativa, 18-40. 

99. Lucian, “Alexander the Oracle-Monger.” 

100. Philostratus, Apollonius, i, 14. 

101. Ibid., 19; iv, 45. 

102. I, 33-4. 

103. Apollonius, epistles xliii and xiv in 
Philostratus. 

104. Philostratus, iv, 3. 

105. Ibid., viii, 29-31. 

CHAPTER XXV 

1. Appian, Roman History, xii, 15. 

2. Frank, IV, 197. 

2a. In the State Museum, Berlin; repro- 
duced in Pope, A., Persian Art, IV, t34A. 

3. Rawlinson, G., Sixth Great Oriental 
Monarchy, 423. 

4. Plutarch, “Crassus.” 

5. Sachar, 105. 

6. Josephus, Antiquities, xiv, 2.9; Strabo, 
xvi, 240. 

7. Josephus, xiv, ii. 

8. Id., Wars, i, 21. 



NOTES 


697 


CHAP. XXVl) 

9. Antiquities, xv, 7; xvi, 5. 

10. Ibid., x\’, 8. 

11. Ibid., II. 

12. Ibid.; Wars, v, 5; Foakes-Jackson and 
Lake, Beginnings of Christianity, I, 5-7; 
Schiirer, Div. I, Vol. I, 280. 

13. Antiquities, xvi, 7. 

14. Our sole authority for this is Josephus, 
Ant., XV, 8.1. 

15. Ibid., 10. 

16. XVII, 5. 

17. Klausner, J., Jesus of Nazareth, 145. 

18. Moore, G., Judaism, I, 23. 

19. Baron, I, 131. 

20. Ibid., 192-3. 

21. Antiquities, iv, 10. 

22. Against Apion, p. 456. 

23. Finkelstein, L., Akiba, 33. 

24. Schiirer, Div. II, Vol. I, 162; Moore, I, 
82; Goguel, M., Life of Jesus, 471; 
Graetz, II, 54-5. 

25. Zeitlin, S., The Jews, 43; id.. The Phari- 
sees and the Gospels, 237; CAH, IX, 408. 

26. Josephus, Wars, i, 8.14. 

27. Philo, Quod onmis homo, 86; Hypo- 
thetica, 11.4 and 12; Josephus, Antiqui- 
ties, xviii, I. 

28. Josephus, Wars, ii, 8. 

29. Ibid., 9. 

30. Graetz, II, 29; Ueberweg, F., History of 
Philosophy, I, 228. 

31. Klausner, 231; Graetz, II, 145. 

32. Josephus, Wars, ii, 8. 

33. In Moore, I, 313. 

34. Hastings, J., Encyclopedia of Religion 
and Ethics, s.v. Hillel. 

35. Philo, in Eusebius, Praeparatio evan- 
gelica, viii, 7. 

36. Babylonian Talmud, Abot, i, 42, Shab, 
31a. 

37. Abot, ii, 4. 

38. Foakes-Jackson, 134; CAH, IX, 420, 

39. Book of Wisdom, ii. 

40. Ibid., V. 

41. Isaiah, ix, 6. 

42. Book of Wisdom, xviii, i3f. 

43. Isaiah, hii. 

44. Daniel, ii, 44; vii, 13!; Song of Solomon, 
xvii. 

45. Sibylline Oracles, iii, 767f in Klausner, 
From Jesus to Paul, 159. 

46. Isaiah, ii, 4; xi, 6; Book of Enoch, i-xxvi; 
Sib. Or., ii, 303f in Klausner, 150. 

47. Book of Wisdom, iv; Enoch, cviii. 

48. Book of Wisdom, ii-iii. 

49. Finkelstein, 263. 

50. Tacitus, Histories, v, 9. 

■I. Josephus, Wars, ii, 14. 


52. Graetz, II, 239. 

53. Josephus, l.c. 

54. Ibid., V, if; Tacitus, v, 12. 

55. Josephus, ii, 14. 

56. Ibid., ii, 18. 

57. Tacitus, V, 13. 

58. Josephus, V, II. 

59. Dio Cassius, Ixv, 4. 

60. Josephus, ix, 3; Tacitus, v, 13. 

61. Strabo in Josephus, Antiquities, xiv, 7. 

62. Philo, Legatio ad Caium, 36. 

63. Baron, I, 132-3; Bevan, E. R., Legacy 
of Israel, 29. 

64. Josephus, Against Apion, ii, 3. 

65. Josephus, Life of Flavius Josephus, p. 
540. 

66 . Finkelstein, 141. 

67. Baron, I, 191. 

68. Dio Cassius, Ixix, izf; Renan, The 
Christian Church, 106. 

69. Moore, Judaism, I, 93. 

70. Finkelstein, 276. 

CHAPTER XXVI 

1. Reinach, S., Short History of Christian- 
ity, 22; Guignebert, Jesus, 63. 

2. Josephus, Antiquities, xviii, 3. 

3. Scott, E., First Age of Christianity, 46; 
Schiirer, I, 143. This conclusion applies 
also to the Slavonic version of Josephus; 
cf. Guignebert, op. cit., 148. 

4. Klausner, Jesus, 46; Goguel, 71. 

5. Pliny the Younger, v, 8. 

6. Tacitus, Annals, xv, 44. 

7. Goguel, 94; Klausner, 60. 

8. Suetonius, “Nero,” 16. 

9. Id., “Claudius,” 25. 

10. Acts of the Apostles, xvuii, 2. Quotations 
from the New Testament are in most 
cases from the translation of E. J. Good- 
speed. 

11. In Goguel, 9, 184. 

12. E.g., Galatians, i, 19; I Corinthians, ix, 5. 

13. I Cor., xi, 23-6. 

14. Ibid., xv, 3; Gal., ii, 20. 

15. Eusebius, EH., iii, 39. 

16. E.g., vi, 30-45; viii, 1-13, 17-20. 

17. Klausner, From Jesus to Paid, 260. 

18. Schweitzer, A., Quest of the Historical 
Jesus, 335. 

19. Irenaeus, Contra Haereses, ii, 1.3. 

20. Guignebert, Jesus, 30; CAH, XI, 260. 

21. Guignebert, 467. 

22. Foaktes-Jackson and Lake, Beginnings of 
Christianity, I, 268. 

23. Enc. Brit., X, 537. 

24. Ibid., XIV, 477. 

25. Partially listed in Enc. Brit., XIII, 95. 



698 


CAESAR AND CHRIST (CHAP. XXVI 


26. Scott, First Age, 217; Enc. Brit., XIII, 98; 
Goguel, 150; CAH, XI, 261. 

27. Matthew, ii, i; Luke, i, 5. 

27a. Luke, iii, i, 23. 

28. Josephus, Wars, ii, 8. 

29. Tertullian, Adv. Marcionem, iv, 19. 

30. Enc. Brit., V, 642; III, 525. 

31. Matt, xiii, 55; Mark, vi, 2. 

32. Guignebert, Jesus, 127; Klausner, 23. 

33. John, vii, 15; Mark, vi, 2. 

34. Thorndike, 471. 

35. Enc. Brit., XIII, 26. 

36. Guignebert, Christianity, 58. 

37. Josephus, Antiquities, xiii, 5. On the 
authenticity of the passage cf. Foakes- 
Jackson and Lake, I, loi. 

38. Graetz, II, 145. 

39. Matt., iii, 11-12. 

40. Ibid., 23. 

41. John, 2. 

42. Josephus, Antiquities, xviii, 5. 

43. Mark, vi, 14-29. 

44. Matt., xiv, 1-12. 

45. Mark, i, 14; Matt., iv, 12. 

46. Luke, iv, 14. 

47. Isaiah, Ixi, t-2. 

48. Luke, iv, 19. 

49. Luke, vi, 14. 

50. Mark, Lx, 48; Matt., xiii, 37. 

51. Luke, xvi, 25. 

52. Mark, xi, 12-14. 

53. Matt., xii, 46; Luke, viii, 19. 

54. Mark, i, 7; Alatt., v, 40; Luke, vi, 29. 

55. Guignebert, Jesus, 186. 

5<5. Klausner, 69. 

57. Luke, vii, 36-59. 

58. Mark, x, 16. 

59. Cf. Robertson, J. M^ Christianity and 
Mythology. 

do. Matt., xiii, 57. 

61. Mark, v, 35f. 

62. Matt., xix, 28. 

63. Luke, X, 1-4. 

64. Guignebert, Jesus, 52, 253; Goguel, 282, 
287. 

65. E.g., Matt., XX, 1-16. 

66. Matt., xxiv, 30. 

67. John, xviii, 36. 

68. Mark, iv, ii, 30; xii, 34. 

69. Luke, xvii, 20. 

70. Matt., xix, 29. 

71. Cf. Schweitzer, 212; Guignebert, 341. 

72. Mark, xiv, 25. 

73. Matt., X, 23. 

74. Matt., xvi, 28. 

75. Luke, xiii, 30. 

76. Mark, xiii, 32. 

77. Matt., xxiv, 6-12. 


78. E.g., Kautsky, K., Ursprung des Chris- 
tentums; Kalthoff, A., Rise of Christian- 
ity. 

79. Mark, x, 23; Matt., vi, 25; xix, 24; Luke, 
xvi, 13. 

80. Matt., xix, 15. 

81. Acts, ii, 44-5. 

82. Matt., xxii, 21. 

83. Matt., XXV, 14. 

84. Luke, xix, 26. 

85. Matt., XX, 15. 

86. Matt., xxiv, 46; Luke, xvii, 7-10. 

87. Matt., xi, 12. 

8R Alark, i, 14-15; vi, 12; A'latt., x, 7. 

89. Luke, xviii, 29; xiv, 26; Matt., viii, 2if; 
x, 34; xix, 12. 

90. Leviticus, xix, 17-18, 34, 

91. Exodus, xxiii, 4-5. 

92. Jeremiah, iii, 30. 

93. Isaiah, i, 6. 

94. Ibid., i, 2. 

95. Hosea, ii, i. 

96. Alatt., X, 5. 

97. Acts, x-xi. 

98. John, iv, 22. 

99. Matt., XV, 24!; Mark, vii, 27. 

100. Alatt., viii, 4. 

10 1. Matt., xxiii, i. 

102. Matt., V, 17. 

103. Luke, xvi, 17; Matt., v, 18. 

104. Eoakes-Jackson and Lake, I, 316. 

105. Matt., V, 31-2. 

106. Matt., V, 21-2. 

107. Mark, ii, 25. 

108. Luke, xvi, 16; Mart., v, 18. 

109. Alatt., xxiii, 1-34; xxi, 31. 

no. Cf. Mark, xxii, 32-3, and Klausner, 
Jesus, 1 13. 

111. Luke, xiii, 31-3. 

1 12. Acts, i, 6. 

1 13. Alark, xii, 35-7. 

114. Alatt., xix, 17. 

1 15. Alatt., xvi, 39. 

116. Daniel, vii, 13. 

1 17. Alatt., xii, 8. 

Ilk Alatt., xi, 27; Luke, x, 22. 

1 19. Alatt., xvi, i6f. 

120. Luke, xix, 37. 

121. John, xii, 13. 

122. Alark, xiv, 49; Luke, xxi, i; xxi, 37. 

123. John, xi, 50. 

124. Mark, x, 45; xiv, 24. 

125. E.g., Guignebert, Jesus, 454; Brandes, G., 
Did Jesus Exist?, 104. 

126. Cf. Goguel, 497. 

127. Alark, xiv, 26; Klausner, 326. 

128. John, xiii, 33. 

129. Alark, xiv, 43. 

130. Alark, xiv, 61 ; Alatt., xxvi, 63. 



699 


NOTES 


CHAP. XXVIl) 

13 1. Philo, Legatio, 38. 

132. Matt., xxvii, ii. 

133. John, xviii, 38. 

134. Tacitus, /Iwna/t, XV, 44. 

135. Luke, xxiii, 26. 

136. Cicero, V in Ferret, 64. 

137. Mark, xv, 32. 

138. Luke, xxiii, 39-43. 

139. John, xix, 25; Mark, xv, 37. 

140. Justinian, Digest, xlviii, 20.6. 

141. Luke, xxiii, 48. 

142. Luke, xxiv, 13-32. 

143. Matt., xxviii, 16-17. 

144. John, xxi, 4. 

145. Luke, xxiv, 52. 

CHAPTER XXVn 

1. FoakeS'Jackson and Lake, II, passim, and 
especially, 305-6; Scott, First Age, no; 
CAH, XI, 257-8; Klausner, From Jesus 
to Paul, 215; Ramsay, W. M., The 
Church in the Roman Empire, 6-8; 
Renan, Apostles, p. v. 

2. Shotwell, J., and Loomis, L., The See of 
Peter, 56-7. 

3. I Peter, iv, 7. 

4. I John, ii, 18. 

5. Acts, ii, 16. 

6 . Ibid., xi, 8. 

7. V, 20. 

8. Mark, vi, 13. 

9. Acts, iv, 32-6; ii, 44-5. 

10. IV, 4. 

11. VI, II. 

12. VII, 51-3. 

13. VIII, 2-3. 

14. XI, 19. 

15. I Cor., ix, 5; Clement of Alexandria, 
Stromata, vii, ii; Eusebius, EH., iii, 30. 

16. I Peter, i, i-iv, 8. 

17. Shotwell and Loomis, 64-5. 

18. Lactantius, De Mortibiis Persecutorum, 

2. 

19. Eusebius, ii, 25. 

20. Ibid., iii, i. 

21. Renan, Antichrist, 93. 

22. Acts, xiii, 9; Coneybeare and Howson, 
Fife, Times, and Travels of St. Paul, I, 
46, 150. 

23. Guignebert, Christianity, 75-6; Living- 
stone, R. W., The Legacy of Greece, 

33. 54- 

24. Acts, xxi, 3. 

25. Renan, Jesus, 167. 

26. II Cor., X, 9. 

27. Ibid., xii, 7. 

28. Gal., V, 12. 

29. II Cor., xi, I. 


30. Acts, ix, I. 

31. IX, 3-9. 

32. IX, 18. 

33- XV, I. 

34. XV, 27-9. The account in Acts har- 
monizes sufficiently well, pace Renan 
and others, with Paul’s report in Gal. ii. 

35. Gal. ii, 10. 

36. Ibid., ii, iii. 

37. Acts, xvii, 18. 

38. XVII, 22. 

39. XVIII, 12. 

40. II Cor., ii, 16. 

41. Acts, xxi, 21-4. 

42. XXVIII, 28. 

43. Guignebert, Christianity, 65; Goguel, 
105; CAH, XI, 257; Klausner, Jesus, 63. 

44. Coloss., iii, 15. 

45. II Cor., iii, 6. 

46. I Cor., XV, 33. 

47. Titus, i, 15. 

48. I Timothy, vi, 10. The letters to Titus 
and Timothy, howev'er, are of doubtful 
authenticity. 

49. I Cor., ix, 19; X, 33. 

50. Romans, v, 12. 

51. Frazer, Sir J., The Scapegoat, 210, 413; 
Weigall, 7of. 

52. Guignebert, Christianity, 88. 

53. I Cor., XV, 51. 

54. Ibid., i, 24. 

55. Coloss., i, 15-17. 

56. Rom., ix, II, 18; xi, 5. 

57. Hebrews, .xi, i. Probably not Paul’s. 
fS. Gal. ii, 24!. 

59. I Cor., xiii. 

60. Ibid., ix, 5. 

61. VII, 8. 

62. Rom., xiii, 14 

63. Ibid., i, 26. 

64. I Cor., vi, 15. 

65. Ibid., vii, 2of. 

66. Rom., xiii, i. 

65a. II Tim., iv, 9, 6. 

67. Philippians, iii, 20. 

68. I Cor., vii, 29; cf. I Thessalonians, iv, 15. 

69. II Thess., ii, 1-5. 

JO. Acts, xvii, 7. 

71. Eusebius, EH., iii, i. 

72. Cf. Revelation, xvii, 10. 

73. Renan, Antichrist, 95; C.\H, X, 726. 

74. Duchesne, Mon. L., Early History of the 
Christian Church, I, 99. 

75. Eusebius, iii, 25. 

76. Ibid., iii, 33. 

77. Rev., vii, 4; xiv, i. 

78. Ibid., vi, 2-8. 

79. VII, 14. 



yoo 


CAESAR AND CHRIST (CHAP. XXVIII 


8 0. XX, ty, xxi, 8. 

81. XIX, i8. 

82. XXI. 

83. Proverbs, viii, 22-31. 

84. John, i, 5. 

85. Justin, Apology, i, 66; Tertullian, De 
Baptismo, 5; Halliday, 9. 

CHAPTER XXVIII 

1. Duchesne, I, 38. 

2. Tertullian, Contra Marcionem, v, 8. 

3. Jerome, Letters, xciii. 

4. Clement of Alexandria, Paedagogus, iii, 

II. 

5. Paul, I Cor., xi, 3. 

6. Lucian, Peregrinus Proteus. 

7. Tertullian, Apologeticus, x-xxLx, 11-12. 

8. Ibid., j. 

9. Renan, Marc Aurele, 600. 

10. James, v, i; ii, 5. 

11. Ibid., i, 10. 

12. Renan, St. Paul, 402, 

13. Klausner, From Jesus to Paul, 113-4. 

14. Tertullian, De jejuniis, i, 17; Duchesne, 
II, 253; Renan, Christian Church, 211; 
Robertson, History of Freethought, I, 
244. 

15. Clement of Alex., Paedag., iii, ir, Renan, 
Marc Aurele, 520. 

16. Tertullian, Apol., ix, 8. 

17. Gibbon, I, 480. 

18. Tertullian, De spectaculis, i, 3. 

19. Sumner, W. G., War and Other Essays, 

54 - 5 - 

20. Tertullian, Apol., xlvi, 10. 

21. Friedlander, III, 204; Tertullian. De ex- 
hort. castitatis, 13; Lea, H. C., Historical 
Sketch of Sacerdotal Celibacy, 41; Rob- 
ertson, History of Freethought, I, 244. 

22. Pliny the Younger, x, 97. 

23. Galen in Hammerton, IV, 2179. 

24. Tertullian, De spect., 23. 

25. Perhaps anthropophagic; cf. Sumner, 
Folkways, 451. 

26. Renan, St. Paul, 268. 

27. Frazer, Sir J., Spirits of the Com and 
Wild, II, 92-3; Carpenter, Edw., Pagan 
and Christian Creeds, 65-7. 

28. Acts, viii, 14-17; xix, 1-6. 

29. Catholic Encyclopedia, IV, 217-8. 

30. Matt., xvi, 18; John, x.x, 23. 

31. Friedlander, II, 364. 

32. Renan, Marc Aurele, 449. 

33. Tertullian, Apol., xxx\-ii, 4. 

34. Id., Ad uxorem, i, 5; Renan, Marc, 551; 
Glover, Conflict of Religions, 341. 

,5. CAH, XII, 456. 

36. Lake, K., Apostolic Fathers, I, 395. 


37. Murray, Sir G., Five Stages of Greek 
Religion, 196. 

38. Renan, Marc, 292. 

39. Duchesne, I, 196. 

40. Friedlander, III, 192. 

41. CAH, XII, 459. 

42. Origen, Contra Celsum, in Glover, 251; 
Carpenter, 220. 

43. Plotinus, Ermeads, xHii. 

44. Porphyry, Life of Plotinus, 14. 

45. MacKenna, Stephen, Essence of Plotinus, 

I in. 

46. Plotinus, Enneads, iii, 4. 

47. Ibid., vi, 9. 

48. V, I. 

49. IV, i; Inge, Philosophy of Plotinus, II 
21-4, 92. 

50 Plotinus, V, i; iii, 7. 

51. Ibid., V, II. 

52. MacKenna, introd., xx. 

53. In Lake, Apostolic Fathers, I, 23 

54. Tertullian, Apol., xxx, 4. 

53. Ibid., xvii, 6. 

56. Id., De spect., 30. 

57. Id., De cultu feviinarum. 

tR In Ueberweg, I, 303. , 

59. CAH, XII. 593. 

60. Eusebius, vi, 2. 

61. Gibbon, I, 467. 

62. Jerome, Letters, xxxiii. 

63. Shotwell, Introduction, 292. 

64. Origen, De principiis, i, 15-16, in Hatch, 

76. 

65. Origen, op. cit., iv, i, in Hatch, 76. 

66. Duchesne, I, 255!. 

67. Inge, Plotinus, II, 19, 102. 

68. In Watson, Marcus Aurelius, 305. 

69. Matt., xvi, 18. 

70. Shotwell and Loomis, 64-5. 

71. Ibid., 60-1, 84-6. 

72. Lake, I, 12 1. 

73. Duchesne, I, 215. 

74. CAH, XII, 198, 600. 

75. Cyprian’s Letters in Inge, Plotinus, I, 62. 

CHAPTER XXIX 

1. Herodian, History of Twenty Caesars, 
II, 83. 

2. Dio Cassius, Ixxiv, 5. 

3. Herodian, II, 100, 103; III, 155. 

4. Historia Augusta, “Septimius Severus,” 
xviii, II. 

5. Herodian, III, 139. 

6. Lot, F., End of the Ancient World, 10. 

7. Dio, Ixxix, 7. 

8. Ibid., Ixxviii, 16. 

9. Herodian, IV, 210; Dio, Lxxviii, 22. 

10. Dio, Ixxix, 23. 



CHAP. XXX) 

11. Historia Augusta, “Elagabalus,” 19-32; 
Dio, Ixxx, 13; Herodian, IV, 253. 

12. Dio, Ixxix, 14; Gibbon, I, 141. 

13. Historia Augusta, “Severus Alexander” 

30. 39- . 

14. Herodian, VI, 5. 

15. Hist. Aug., “Severus Alexander,” 20. 

16. Ibid., 29. 

17. Ibid., 33. 

18. Herodian, VI, 8. 

19. In Rostovtzeff, Social and Economic 
History of the Roman Empire, 399. 

20. Gibbon, I, 294. 

21. Maine, Ancient Law, 177. 

22. West, L., “Economic Collapse of the 
Roman Empire,” in Classical Journal, 
1932, p. 106. 

23. Abbott, Common People, 174. 

24. Rostovtzeff, op. cit., 424, 442-3 

25. Ibid., 305. 

26. Frank, Economic History, 489. 

27. Ferrero, Rum of Ancient Civilization, 
58; Rostovtzeff, History of the Ancietit 
World, II, 317. 

28. Frank, Economic Survey, IV, 220. 

29. Rostovtzeff, Roman Empire, 419. 

30. Collingwood and Myres, 20.3. 

31. Heath, II, 448. 

32. Plato, Laws, 819. 

33. Ball, W. W., Short History of Mathe- 
matics, 96. 

34. Justinian, Digest, i, 1.4. 

35. Hist. Aug., “Severus Alexander,” 51. 

36. Roberts, W. R., introd. to ‘^Longinus” 
on the Sublime, Loeb Library. 

37. Heliodorus, Greek Romances, i. 

^ 8 . Ibid., 289. 

39. In Catullus, Tibullus, etc., p. 343. 

40. In Burckhardt, J., Die Zeit Constantins, 
54- 

41. CAH, XII, 273; Frank, Econotnic Sur- 
vey, III, 633. 

42. Ferrero, Ancient Rome and Modem 
America, 88. 

43. Toutain, 326. 

44. West, 1. c., 102. 

45. Rostovtzeff, Ancient World, II, 329. 

46. Toutain, 326; CAH, XII, 271; Catnbridge 
Medieval History, I, 52. 

47. Rostovtzeff, Roman Empire, 474. 

4k Cunningham, W. C., Western Civiliza- 
tion in Its Economic Aspects, I, 191-2. 

49. Paul-Louis, 283-5. 

50. Translation based on that of Elsa Glaser 
in Frank, Economic Survey, V, 312. 

51. Ibid., The prices are calculated on the 
valuation of gold at $35 per oz. in the 
United States of 1944. 

52. Frank, Survey, III, 612. 


701 

53. Lactantius, De Mortibus Persecutorum, 
vii. 

54. Ibid., vii, 3. 

55. Charlesworth, 98. 

56. West, 105; Ferrero, Ruin of Ancient 
Civilization, 106. 

57. Cunningham, I, 188. 

58. Frank, Survey, II, 245; IV, 241. 

59. Reid, Municipalities, 492; Arnold, 265. 

60. Heitland, 382. 

61. Davis, W. S., 233. 

62. Frank, Economic History, 404; Rostov- 
tzeff, Roman Empire, 409. 

63. Gibbon, I, 377. 

CHAPTER XXX 

1. Renan, Marc, 592. 

2. Tertullian, ApoL, xl, i. 

3. Minucius Felix, Octavius, ix, 5, in Ter- 
tullian, Apol. 

4. Guignebert, Christianity, 164. 

5. I Cor., vi, I ; Renan, Marc, 597. 

6. Origen Contra Celsum, viii, 69, in Halli- 
day, 27. 

7. Tertullian, Apol., xv, 1-7; Duchesne, I, 
34- 

8. Friedlander, III, 186. 

9. Tertullian, Apol., iv, i. 

10. Ramsay, 253; C.AH, X, 503. 

Ill Duchesne, I, 82. 

12, Bury, J., History of Freedotn of 
Thought, 42, 

13, Tertullian, Apol., v, 4; Eusebius, iii, 17. 

14, Pliny the Younger, x, 96-7. 

15. Rescript of Hadrian in Eusebius, iv, 9, 
For a defense of its authenticity cf. Ram- 
say, 320. 

16. From an account said to have been sent 
to the Christian churches by the elders 
of the church at Smyrna, in Lake, Apos- 
tolic Fathers, II, 321. 

17. Renan, Marc, 331. 

Tertullian, Apol., xlv, 14. 

19. Memoirs of St. Perpetua, in Davds and 
West, Readings in Ancient History, 287. 

20. Rostovtzeff, Ancient World, II, 349. 

21. Duchesne, I, 267. 

22. Lactantius, De Mortibus Persecutorum, 

X. 

23. Eusebius, viii, if. 

24. Gibbon, II, 57. 

25. Eusebius, viii, 17. 

26. Tertullian, Apol., i, 13. 

27. Ambrose in Enc. Brit., VI, 297. 

28. Eusebius, Life of Constantine, i, 28. 

29. Eusebius, E.H., viii, 2. 

30. Id., Life of Constantine, i, 28. 

31. Lactantius, De Mortibus, xliv, 5. 


NOTES 



702 


CAESAR AND CHRIST 


(chap. XXX 


32. Cambridge Medieval History, I, 4. 

33. For the detailed evidence cf. Burck- 
hardt, 

34. Hist. Aug., “Elagabalus,” xxxiv, 4. 

35. Lot, 29. 

36. Flick, A. C., Rise of the Medieval 
Church, 123-4. 

37. Duruy, V., History of the Roman Peo- 
ple, VII, 510. 

38. Kalthoff, 172; Lot, 98. 

39. Eusebius, Life, ii, 36. 

40. Ibid., iii, 62!. 

41. Duchesne, I, 290. 

42. Eusebius, E.H., viii, i. 

43. Duchesne, II, 99. 

44. Eusebius, Historical Vietr of the Coun- 
cil of Nice, 6. 

45. Ibid. 

46. Eusebius, Life, ii, 63, 70. 

47. Eusebius, Nice, 6 . 

48. Ibid., 15. 

49. Cambridge Medieval History, I, 121. 

50. Socrates, Ecclesiastical History, i, 8. 

51. Duchesne, II, 125. 

52. Ferrero, Ruin, 170. 

53. Gatteschi, 24; Reinach, Apollo, 89. 


54. Gibbon, VI, 553. 

55. Lactantius, Divinae Institutiones, v, 19. 

56. Eusebius, Life, i, i. 

57. Cambridge Medieval History, I, 15. 

EPILOGUE 

1. Reid, J. S., in Cambridge Medieval His- 
tory, I, 54. 

2. Cyprian, Ad Demetrium, 3, in Inge, 
Plotinus, I, 25. 

3. Cf. West, op. cit., 103. 

4. Frank, Survey, III, 575. 

5. In Eusebius, E. H., vii, 21. 

6. Rostovtzeff, Roman Empire, 424. 

7. Frank, Survey, III, 74. 

8. Gibbon, I, 421. 

9. Davis, Influence of Wealth, 214. 

10. Gibbon, I, 274. 

11. Id., chap. x\'i, etc. 

12. Renan, Marc, 589; Ferrero, Ruin, 7, 74; 
White, E. L., Why Rome Fell, passim. 

13. Alontesquieu, Grandeur et decadence 
des Romains, 36. 

14. Cambridge Medieval History, I, 10. 

15. Abbott, 201. 

16. Rostovtzeff, Roman Empire, 445. 



Index 

I am indebted for this index to the careful scholarship of Mr. Arnold Canell.-W. D. 


A 

Abeona, 59 

abortion, 211, 222, 313, 363-364, 396-397, 479, 
505, 598, 666 

About Nature, see Physeos,Peri 
Abraham, 626, 662 

absentee landlordism, 77, 233, 311, 631 
Abstinents, 605 

Abtolim, Jewish rabbi (fl. ist century b.c.), 
538 

Ab Urbe Condita (Livy), 250-252 
Academic, see Platonic 
Academica (Cicero), 163* 

Academy, Plato’s, 4.21, 489, 495, 497 
Acca Larentia (Lupa), nurse of Romulus and 
Remus, 12 

Accius, tragic dramatist (170-? B.a), 98 
Achaea, 216, 424, 482 
Achaean League, 86 
Achaemenids, 507, 528, 529, 641 
Acheron, 147, 238, 389 

Achillas, Egyptian general (fl. 1st century 
B.C.), 187 

Achilleid (Statius), 316 
Achilles, 37, 100, 353, 354, 381 
Acropolis, 487 

Acta Diuma, 172, 382, 435, 447 
Acta Senatus, 435 

Acte, Claudia, mistress of Nero ( 1st century), 
277. 284 

acting, in Etruria, 18; in Rome, 18, 73-74, 83, 
99, 223, 265-266, 278-279, 283, 378-379. 4^8 
Actium (naval battle, 31 B.c.), 128, 139, 207, 
208, 217, 218, 219, 241, 358, 434, 442, 465, 482 
Acts of the Apostles, The, 403, 554, 556, 573, 
575-595 

Acts of the Martyrs, 648, 652 
Adam, 588-589, 599 

Addison, Joseph, English essayist and poet 
(1672-1719), 304 
Adelphi (Terence), loi 
Aden (one. Adena), 325, 508 
Adige (one. Athesis), 454 
administration, of Caesar, 190-194; of Augus- 
tus, 215-217; of Claudius, 270-271; of Nero, 
275-276; of Vespasian, 287-288; of Domitian, 
291; under the Principate, 293, 328, 330, 344, 
391, 434; of Trajan, 409, 441; of Hadrian, 
414-416, 419-420; of Antoninus Pius, 422- 
424; of Commodus, 447-448; of Alexander 
Severus, 626-627; of Gallienus, 629; of Dio- 
cletian, 639-645; of Constantine, 664; mo- 
narchic, 668-669 
Adonis, 256, 523, 553, 595 
Adoptionists, 605 


Ad Pisones (Horace), 249 
Adramyttium, 518 

Adria fane. Hadria, or Atria), ii, 414 
Adrian of Tyre, Greek rhetorician (ca. 112- 
ca. 192), 488-489 

Adrianople fane. Adrianopolis), 483, 655, 670 
Adriatic Sea, 37, 47, 50, 157, 183, 184, 203, 207, 
232, 324, 325, 414, 455, 480, 496, 602 
Aduatici, 175 

adultery, 69, 134-135, 144, 157, (Caesar’s) 
168-169, -02. 21 1. 222-224, 220, 230-232, 248, 
253, 255, 272-273, 274, 279, 290, 293, 297-298, 
302, 312, 363, 369-370, 396, 424, 430, 438, 479, 
485, 495, 529, 562, 599, 618, 621, 622 
Adversus Haereses (Irenaeus), 612 
Aebutia, lex, 401 
Aedes Vestae, 359 

aediles, 22, 28, 29*, 74, 82, 99, 328, 336, 369 
Aedui, 174-175, 177 
Aegatean (Aegadean) Isles, 45 
Aegean Sea, 139, 157, 429, 514, 592, 602, 630 
Aelia Capitolina, see Jerusalem 
Aelianus, Claudius, historian (fl. 2nd cen- 
tury),442 

Aelius, see Aristides, Publius Aelius 
Aelius, Pons, 422 

Aetnilia, stepdaughter of Sulla and wife of 
Pompey (fl. 1st century b.c.), 134 
Aemilian (Marcus Julius Aemilius Aemili- 
anus), Roman emperor (?-253), 629 
Aemihan Way, 78 
Aemilii, Roman clan, 21, 364 
Aemilius, Pons, 340, 438 
Aeneas, 12,61,98,148,167,237,239-241,382456 
Aeneid (Virgil), 225, 239-244, 254, 456 
Aenesidemus of Cnossus, Greek Skeptic (1st 
century), 494 
Aequi, 36 
aerarivm, 220 

Aeschines, Athenian orator (389-314 b.c.), 95 
Aeschylus, Greek dramatist (525-456 b.c.), 
258 

Aesculapius, 62, 75, 311, 487, 526 
Aesopus, Claudius, tragic actor (fl. ist cen- 
tury B.C.), 133, 160, 378 
Aethiopica (Heliodorus), 636-637 
Aetna, 265 
Aetolian League, 85 

Afranius, politician (?-46 b.c.), 129, 185 
Africa, 38, 39, 40, 53, 54, 78, 85, 105, 106-107, 
III, 112, 119, 123, 138, 183, 189, 190, 203, 216, 
237, 246, 297, 308, 313, 320, 322, 326, 328-329, 
336, 346, 347, 356, 366, 413, 417, 418, 431, 441, 
442, 455, 464-466, 468, 470, 475, 499, 513, 523, 


703 



INDEX 


704 

Africa {continued) 

602, 603, 606, 613, 618, 621, 628, 631, 633, 636, 
658, 659, 669-6-jo 

Africanus, Sextus Julius, Christian historian 

(?-232), 55j 

Against Apion (Josephus), 500, 546 
Against Catiline (Cicero), 142 
Against Celsus (Origen), 606, 615 
agape, 386, 597-598 

Agathocles, Tyrant of Syracuse (36i?-289 
B.C.), 42 

ager publicus, 76, 113-114, 116, 121, 171, 287, 

320, 336 
Aglibol, 51 1 
Agnus Dei, 578-579 

Agricola, Cnaeus Julius, governor (37-93), 
288, 291, 433-434. 435-436, 476 
Agricola (Tacitus), 433-434. 435 - 43 ^ 
agriculture, Carthaginian, 39-40, 42; under 
Rome, 54, 76-77, 103-104, (agrarian revolt) 
111-127, 190, 192, 211, 235, 237-239, 311, 319- 

321, 338, 348, 410-411, 448, 464, 473, 474, 476, 
478, 483, 498, 522, 528-529, 535, 631-633, 644, 
665, ^8, 671 

Agrigentum (Girgenti), 52, H2, 464 
Agrippa, King of Chalcis (30-100), 586-587 
Agrippa, Herod, King of the Jews (reigned 
41-44), 543 

Agrippa, Marcus Vipsanius, general (63-12 
B.C.), 205, 207, 212, 214, 215, 219-220, 230-232, 
263*, 308, 340, 359, 375, 420, 474 
Agrippa, Baths of, 290, 340, 359, 375 
Agrippina, wife of Germanicus (?-33 ajj.), 
262-265, 273 

Agrippina the Younger, mother of Nero (?- 
59), 263*, 272, 273-275, 277, 279, 280, 302, 479 
Ahenobarbi, Domitii, Roman family, 274 
Ahenobarbus, Cnaeus Domitius, father of 
Nero (fl. ist century), 273, 274, 282, 334 
Ahriman, 524 
Ahura-Mazda, 524, 529 
Aisne (one. Axona), 175 
Akiba ben Joseph, Jewish rabbi (40-138), 547- 
549 

Alalia, battle of (535 b.c.), 7 

Alaric, King of the Visigoths (376? -410), 670 

Alba Longa, ii, 12, 241, 344 

Alban hills, 77, 82 

Albania, in Asia, 413 

Alban poetry contest, 316 

Albinus, procurator of Judea (fl. ist century), 

543 ^ 

Albinus, Clodius, rival of Septimius Severus 
for emperorship (P-ipa), 621 
Alcaeus, Greek lyric poet (620-580 b.c.), 247 
Alcibiades, Athenian politician and general 
(450-404 B.C.), 147 

Alciphron, Greek letter writer (fl. 180), 488 
Alcmaeon, 278 
Alcmena, 93, 100 

Alcon, surgeon ifl. ist century), 312 
Aldobrandini, Villa, 454* 


“Aldobrandini” Wedding, 354 
Alemanni, 175, 627, 629, 638 
Alesia (Alise Ste.-Reine), 177 
Alexander the Great, King of Macedon (356- 
323 B.C.), 28, 37, 39, 169, 194, 208, 218, 226, 
302, 413, 500, 557*, 623, 636, 641 
Alexander, Bishop of Alexandria (fl. 4th cen- 
tur)0, 658 660, 662 

Alexander, son of Herod the Great (?-6 b.c.) , 
534 

Alexander of Abonoteichus, Greek worker of 
miracles (fl. ist century), 525-526 
Alexander Severus (Marcus Alexianus Bassi- 
anus Aurelius Severus Alexander), Roman 
emperor (2o8?-235), 375, 623, 625-627, 628, 

634, 635, 645, 650 
Alexander Severus, Baths of, 375 
Alexandria, 93, 155, 158, 159, 186, 187-188, 190, 

204, 206, 207, 21 1, 218, 234, 253, 266, 280, 291, 
299, 312, 323, 325, 326, 329, 331, 339, 347, 352, 
355. 356, 368, 374, 378, 380, 386, 389, 419, 431, 
465. 494. 498-506, 508, 516, 521-522, 544, 545, 
546, 604, 608, 61 1, 613, 615, 623, 626, 630, 634, 

635, 650, 658-659, 660*, 666 

A lexandria, library of, 188, 291, 516, 635 
Alexandria, Museum of, 415, 419 
Alexandria Issi (Alexandretta), 513 
A.lexandrian style, 361 
Alexandria Troas, 516, 583, 602 
Alfieri, V'ittOrio, Count, Italian dramatist 
(1749-1803), 3 
algebra, 633-634 

Alighieri, Dante, Italian poet (1265-1321), 8, 
240. 243, 422, 437, 671 
alvmenta, 407, 41 1, 427, 461, 666 
A.llia (battle, 390 B.c.), 36 
alphabet, Latin, 73, 269 

Alps, 3, 5, 6, II, 36, 47, 48-49, 53, 87, 1 18, 1 19, 
137. > 75 . 178. 324. 429. 454. 474. 6o 2, 628, 640, 
654, 670 
Altamira, 468 

Altar of the Augustan Peace, see Ara Pads 
Augustae 
Altinum, 461 
Amasea (Amasia), 520 
Amastris (Amasra), 157, 520 
Ambarvalia (Feast of the Arval Brother- 
hood), 59, 66 
Ambiani, 175, 471* 

Ambracia (Arta),92 

Ambracian Gulf (Gulf of Arta), 207 

America, 132, 307, 352 

America, Latin, 671 

American Revolution, 192, 670 

Atnhaarez, 562 

Amicitia, De (Cicero), 163* 

Amiens (anc. Samarobriva, later Ambiani), 

471* 

Amisus (Samsun),52o 
Amitemum, 455 

Ammianus Marcellinus, historian ( fl. 4th cen- 
tury), 322*, 365, 380, 402, 471, 504 



INDEX 


Amores (Ovid), 254 

amphitheaters, 82, 90, in, 133, lyj, 355, 359- 
361, 362, 378, 383-387, 410, 454, 455, 456, 459, 
460-461, 465, 466, 474, 508, 512, 532, 612-613, 
648, 649, 653 

Amphitryon (Plautus), 100 
Ampurias {one. Emporium), 47 
amulets, 60, 62, 373 

Amulius, legendary usurper to the throne of 
Latium (8th cenmry b.c.), 12 
Amuhus, painter (fl. ist century), 352 
Amyot, Jacques, French savant, and Bishop 
of Auxerre (i5i3-i593),637 
Anabasis of Alexander (Flavian), 520 
Anacreon, Greek lyric poet (56o?-475? b.c.), 
158, 235, 247, 509 
Analogy, On (Caesar), 162 
Anastasius I, Roman Pope (?-40i ) , 615 
ancestor worship, 56, 59, 83-84, 226 
Anchises, 240-241, 382 
Ancona, 410 

Ancus Marcius, fourth King of Rome (fl. 7th 
century b.c.), 14 
‘ Ancyra (Angora), 513 
Andrew, apostle, 563 
Andria (Terence), loi 
Androcles, slave (dates uncertain), 385 
Andromeda, 256 
anesthetics, 313, 505 
Anger, On (Seneca), 302 
Anglo-Saxon, 477 

Amcetus, Roman Pope (ca. 137-ca. 168), 617 
Anicetus, courtier of Nero (fl. ist century 
B.C.), 279 

Anhyia, De (Terrullian), 613 
animals, feeling for, in Lucretius, iq'^; in Vir- 
gil, 238; Pliny on, 310; Hadrian’s, 414 
animism, 60 
Anio, 22 

Anio Novus Aqueduct, 270 
Anna, daughter of Phanuel, 542 
Atinales (Ennius), 98, 164 
Annales (Tacitus), 434-437, 442 
Anna Perenna, 65 
Annas, priest (in the Bible), 571 
Annona, 388 
Annunciation, 558 

Anthony, Saint, Egyqitian founder of mona- 
chism (251-356?), 445, 657 
anthropology, Lucretius on, 152-153 
Antibes {anc. Antipolis), 78, 474 
Anti-Cato (Caesar), 195 
Antichrist, 575, 593 

Antigonus, King of Judea (fl. 43 b.c.), 531 
Anti-Lebanon Mountains, 51 1 
Antinoopolis, 419 

Antinoiis, Greek favorite of Hadrian (?-i22), 
419, 44^. 5^3 

Antioch (Antakia), 54, 205, 280, 329, 413, 418, 
428, 495, 504, 534, 546, 576, 582-583, 585, 588, 
602, 608, 61 1, 623, 626, 629, 635, 650 
Antioch (in Pisidia), 582 


705 

Antiochus III the Great, King of Syria 
(reigned 223-187 b.c.), 55, 86, 88, 91, 528 
Antiochus IV Epiphanes, King of Syria (200?- 
164 B.C.), 107, 418, 487, 534, 540 
Antiochus of Ascalon, Greek Platonic philos- 
opher (fl. ist century b.c.), 489 
Antipater, son of Herod the Great (?-4 B.C.), 
534-535 

Antipater the Idumean, father of Herod and 
procurator of Judea (?-43 b.c.), 531 
Antiquities of the Jews, The (Josephus), 546, 
554 

anti-Semitism, 546, 595 
Antium (Anzio), 280, 340, 453 
Antonia, mother of Germanicus and Claudius 
(ist century B.c.-ist century aj>.), 262, 264, 
265, 266, 267, 268, 269, 274, 371 
Antonines, 324,392,405,41 1,437442,449,516,620 
Antoninus Pius (Titus Aurelius Fulvius Boio- 
nius Arrius Antoninus Pius), Roman em- 
peror (86-161), 345, 368, 392, 395, 396, 398, 
408, 421-425, 426, 427, 428, 430, 444, 51 1, 549, 
611,648 

Antoninus, Wall of, 476 
Antonius, governor (fl. ca. 190), 605 
Antonius, Lucius, governor (fl. ist century 
B.C.), 204-205 

Antonius, Marcus (Mark Antony), Roman 
general (83-30 b.c.), 70, 155, 160, 161, 169, 
i8i, 185, 188, 191, 195-208, 21 1, 226, 228, 229, 
230, 231, 232, 236, 239, 261, 265, 268, 273, 274, 
309, 312, 329, 371, 372, 373, 412, 413, 418, 448, 
482,512,516,531,583,640 
Antonius, Marcus, Roman general, father of 
Antony (fl. ist century b.c.), 144, 160 
Antonius Primus, general of Vespasian (fl. ist 
century), 285, 301 

Antyllus,ophthalmologist (fl. ist century) ,505 
Anubis, 390 
Apamea, 512, 514, 629 
Apamea Celaenae, 513 

Apelles, Greek painter (fl. 330 b.c.), 352, 355 
Apennines, 5, ii, 50, 121, 141, 236, 253, 270, 344 
Aphrodite, 512, 516 
Aphrodite, Temple of (Jerusalem), 663 
Aphrodite Pandemos, Temple of, 487 
Apicata, divorced wife of Sejanus (?-3i a.d.), 
264 

Apicius, famous epicure (fl. reign of Tibe- 
rius), 376-377 

Apion, Greek grammarian (fl. ist cenmry), 
546 

apocalypse, 540-542, 564-570, 575, 590-591, 
592-595, 605, 616 

Apocolocyntosis or Fwsipkinification (Sen- 
eca), 275, 350 

Apoert-pha, 539-540, 559, 575* 

ApoUinaris Sidonius, Caius Sollius, Saint, 
bishop and poet (430? -482?), 473 
Apollo, 8, 62, 64, 236-237, 240, 280, 351, 358, 
381, 458, 513 



INDEX 


706 

Apollo the Healer, 62 
Apollo, Temple of, 358 
Apollo, Temple of (Pompeii), 459 
Apollo the Healer, Temple of, 62 
Apollo Belvedere, 349, 453 
Apollodorus, Greek architect (fl. reign of 
Trajan), 411, 421 

Apollodorus, attendant of Cleopatra ( ist cen- 
tury B.C.), 187 

Apollonia (near Valona), 200, 480, 482 
Apollonia (in Palestine), 508 
Apollonius of Athens, Greek sculptor in 
Rome (fl. ca. birth of Christ), 349 
Apollonius of Rhodes, Greek poet and gram- 
marian (fl. 222-181 B.C.), 241 
Apollonius of Tyana, Greek philosopher (fl. 

ist cenmry), 515, 526, 622, 626 
Apollonius, Life of (Philostratus), 526, 622 
Apollonius Molo of Alabanda, Greek rheto- 
rician (fl. ist century b.c.), 141, 514 
Apollo of Veii, 10 
Apollo Room, 132 
Apologeticus (Tertullian), di2 
Apologia (Apuleius), 467 
“Apologies,” 61 1 

apostles, 556,557,563-565,567,571,572,575-595 
Appian (Appianus), historian (fl. 2nd cen- 
tu^), 189, 196, 197, 424, 442, 471, 518, 519 
Appian Aqueduct, 29, 81, 340 
Appian Way (via /Ippid), 29, 77-78,1 38,340,617 
Apuleius, satirist and philosopher (fl. 2nd 
century), 155, 299, 402, 442, 465, 466-468, 
485, 487, 525, 612, 636, 637 
Apulia, 50, 53, 1 12, 139, 244,455 
Aquae Aureliae (Baden-Baden), 480 
Aquae Salis (Bath), 477 
Aquae Sextiae (Aix), battle in 102 b.c., 119 
Aqua Virgo Aqueduct, 327* 
aqueducts, 81, 92, 103, 220, 270, 326-328, 340, 
3 43 ,3 56,4 1 0,4 1 1 ,4 1 8-4 1 9,464,470474,509,627 
Aquila, called Ponticus, Greek-Jewish trans- 
lator of the OldTestament (fl. 117-138), 614 
Aquileia (Aquileja), 322, 324, 347, 429, 455, 628 
Aqtiilia, lex, 312 

Aquilius, Manius, general (?-88 b.c.), 121, 518 
Aquincum, 480, see also Budapest 
Aquinum, 437, 453 

Aquis Urbis Romae, De (Frontinus), 328 
Aquitania (Gallia Aquitanica), 472, 473 
Aquyrion, 664 

Arabia, 204, 217, 325, 329, 337, 346, 366, 419, 
507-508, 546, 581, 602, 630 
Arabia Deserta, 508 
Arabia Felix (Yemen), 508 
Arabia Petrea, 413, 508 
Arabic, 504, 507 

Arabs, 464, 470, 500, 503, 504, 507, 508, 529, 634 
.Yramaic, 508, 512, 529, 535, 556, 572 
Ara Fads Augustae, 225, 229, 346, 348, 349 
Aratus of Soli, Greek didactic poet (315-245 
B.C.), 238, 308, 584* 

Aransio (Orange), 118, 119,474 


Arcadia, loi 

Arcadius, Roman emperor in the East ( ? -408 ) , 
412 

Arcesilaus, Greek sculptor in Rome (fl. ist 
century B.c.), 342, 349 

arch, 92, 327, 339, 340, 348, 349, 355-361, 443, 
454. 455. 466, 470. 473. 474. 5". 5^9. 623. 635. 
662, 671 

Archagathus the Peloponnesian (Camifex), 
physician (fl. 219 b.c.), 75-76 
Archelaus, King of the Jews (reigned 4 B.C.- 

A. D. 6), 535, 542-543 

Archias, Aulus Licinius, Greek poet in Rome 
(ca. 120-? B.C.), 141, 163 
Archilochus, Greek lyric poet (7i4?-676 

B. C.), 158, 244, 246, 247 

Archimedes, Greek mathematician and scien- 
tist (2873-212 B.C.), 72, 77, 503, 634 
Architectural (Second) Style (painting), 353 
architecture, Etruscan, 8-9, 18; Carthaginian, 
40-41, 42; Byzantine, 421; Parthian, 529; 
under Rome, 18, 75, 81, 92-93, 133, 281, 287, 
338-354 passim, 355-362, 410, 411-413. 418- 
421, 442-443, (Pompeian) 458-459, 464, 465, 
477. 51 1, 514, 515, 516, 532-533, 631, 633, 635, 
661-662, 669, 671 

Architecture, On (Vitruvius), 356 
Archon, Peri (Origen), 614 
archon basileus, 13 

Ardashir I (or Artaxerxes), King of Persia 
(reigned 227-240), 530, 627 
Ardea, 10, 16, 35 

Arellius, painter (fl. end of ist century b.c.), 

352 

Areopagus (Hill of Mars), 487, 584 
Arescon, hermaphrodite mentioned by Pliny, 
310 

Aretas IV, King of Saba (9B.C.-AJ). 40), 508 
Arethusa, 256 

Areus, Greek philosopher in Rome (fl. reign 
of Augusms), 299 
Arezzo (one. Arretium, q.v.), 9 
Argentoratum (Strasbourg), 480, 633 
Argiletum, The, 234 

Argonautica (Apollonius of Rhodes), 241 

Argos, 139, 310, 487, 630 

Ariadne, 157, 256, 352 

Aricia, 35, 61 

Aries, 298 

Ariminum (Rimini), n, 78, 182, 455 
Ariovisms, German chief (fl. ist century 
B.C.), 174-175 

Aristarchus of Samos, Greek astronomer (fl. 
280-264 B.C.), 502 

Aristides, Greek writer of romance (fl. 2nd 
century b.c.) , 636 

Aristides, Publius Aelius, sumamed Theodo- 
rus, Greek rhetorician (117-187), 328, 424, 
515. 5‘6 

Aristippus, Greek philosopher (435? -356? 
B.C.), 494 



INDEX 


Aristobulus II, King of Judea (reigned 67-63 
B.C.), 530 

Aristobulus, grandson of Hyrcanus II (ist 
century B.C.), 532, 534 

Aristobulus, son of Herod the Great (?-6 

B.c.), 534 _ . ^ . 

aristocracy, in Etruria, 6, 17; m Carthage, 
40-43, 46; under Rome, 16-17, 21-31, 34, 64, 
69, 70, 76, 77, 81, 82, 85, 88, 90, 91, 92, 93, 
95, 98, 103, 104, 111-208, 212, 215-216, 222, 
234, 243, 251-252, 258, 260, 267, 270, 271, 279, 
282, 286-287, 292, 296, 297, 313, 319, 332, 335, 
348, 35i> 363-364. 372. 373. 384. 409. 433. 434* 
435, 440, 441, 446, 449, 460, 622, 626, 628, 633, 
641, 644, 670; Cicero on, 165 
Aristonicus, pretender to throne of Perga- 
mum (?-I29 B.C.), 516 

Aristophanes, Greek comic dramatist (448?- 
380? B.C.), 74, 99 

Aristotelian (Peripatetic) philosophy, 95, 432, 
489-490 

Aristotle, Greek philosopher (384-322 b.c.),4, 
25, 42, 79, 123, 302, 308, 311, 421, 490, 497, 
506, 507, 610, 611 
arithmetic, 72, 75 

Arithmetica (Diophantus of Alexandria), 634 
Arius, Greek priest of Alexandria, and foun- 
der of Arianism (28o?-336) ,658-660,662,663 
Ark of the Covenant, 533 
Arles {one. Arelate or Arelas), 192, 474, 658 
Arles, Council of, 658 
Armageddon, 593 

Armenia, 132, 179, 206, 217, 231, 275, 280, 320, 

36641 3414,5 i7,528,6o2,629,63o;Lesser,i88 

Arminius, chief of German tribe of Cherusci 
(18 B.C.-A.D. 19), 218 

army, of Pyrrhus, 38; of Carthage, 43, 46, 48, 
50-51, 53, 106; under the Republic, 33-34, 
46, 49, 50-51, 53, 80, 87, 116, 118-120, 126, 
178-179; under the Principate, 216-217, 220, 
232, 260, 268, 269, 271, 284-285, 292, 293-294, 
330, 336, 340, 417, 429, 620-621; under the 
monarchy, 621-622, 626, 628-629, 632, 633, 
638-639, 641, 661, 669, 670 
Amus (Amo), 454 
Arpinum (Arpino), 118, 141, 162,453 
Arretium (Arezzo), 6, 77, 322, 328, 346, 454 
Arrian (Flavius Arrianus), Greek historian 
and philosopher (ioo?-i7o?), 418, 490, 520 
Arsaces, King of Parthia (fl. ca. 248 B.C.), 528 
Arsacids, 528-529, 622 
Ars Amatoria (Ovid), 255 
Arsinoe, 499 

art, Etruscan, 5, 8-1 1, 18, 149, 339, 350, 359. 
443; Campanian, 37; Greek, 92-93, 95-96. 
338-339. 349. 351-361; German, 479; Byzan- 
tine, 512, 529; Parthian, 529; Christian, 601; 
under the Republic, 18, 77, 92-93, 95, 102, 
108, 123, 125, 132; under the Principate, 
215, 225, 233-234, 269, 277-279, 280, 291, 310, 
338-362, 376, 415, 421, 442-443, 456, 459-460, 
461, 511-512; under the monarchy, 621, 629, 


707 

630, 632, 634-635, 661; of Rome, 671, 672 
Artabanus IV, King of Parthia (3-227), 529, 

530 

Artaxata, 528 
Artemis, 63, 514, 515, 585 
Artemis, Festival of, 515 

Artemis,Temple of (Ephesus),5i5,5i8,585,630 
Artemis, Temple of (Magnesia), 514 
Artes Liberates, 342 
ArtibuSjDe (Celsus), 313 
artisans, see craftsmen 

“Art of Poetry, The” (Horace), see Ad 
Fisones 

Art Foetique, U (Boileau), 249* 

Arval Brotherhood, 59, 66, 73, 388 
Ascalon, 508 

Ascanius (lulus), 167, 240-241 
asceticism, 303, 426, 445, 490, 497, 502, 525- 
526, 527, 537-538, 560, 562, 577, 580, 605, 606, 
607-609, 613, 615, 657, 658, 667 
Asclepiades of Prusa, Greek physician in 
Rome (fl. ist century b.c.), 312, 507 
Asclepieum of Pergamum, 516, 518 
Asclepius, see Aesculapius 
Ascyltos, 297 

Ashoka, Indian ruler and religious teacher 
(reigned 273-232 b.c.), 559* 

Ashur (city), 529 

Asia, 40, 60, 86, 88, 89, 91, 92, 94, 112, 1 17, 124, 
134, 139, 140, 147, 157, 167, 171, 207, 2 1 1, 225, 
226, 308, 324, 347, 355, 359, 366, 389, 392, 412, 
423, 431, 433, 483, 508, 514, 516, 517, 518, 519, 
524, 526, 540, 578, 590, 592, 606, 630, 640, 649*, 
655, 659, 669 

Asia Minor, 5, 8, 116, 130, 187, 216, 262, 320, 
329, 364, 381, 418, 429, 431, 483, 513-516, 518, 
520, 522, 578, 583, 585, 588, 592, 602-603, 605, 
617, 627, 629, 632, 633, 640 
“Asianic” style, 161, 169 
Asiatic style, 361 

Asiaticus, freedman of Viteliius (fl. ist cen- 
t^), 285 

Asisium (Assisi), 455 

Aspasia of Miletus, consort of Pericles (470?- 
410 B.C.), 187, 487 
Aspendus, 513 

assassination as a political method, 260 
Assembly, Centurial, 23-30, 33, 34, 44, 50, 52, 
85, 91-92, 107, 116-117, 119, 139-140, 200, 232, 
260, 265, 269, 393 
Assembly, Curial, 25-26, 393, 395 
Assembly, Tribal, 24, 26-28, 30, 34, 47, 91, 113- 
115, 121-122, 123, 126, 145, 171, 173, 179. 180, 
i8i, 188, 191, 201, 213, 223, 232, 260, 340, 393 
Assyria, 4i3,-4i4, 51 1 
Astarte, 41 

Astraea, 237*; see also Virgin 

astrology, 75, 147. 164, 231, 259, 278, 292, 308, 

311,388415425,435,503,512,514,525,559,621 
astronomy, 75, 307-308, 309, 367-368, 472, 488. 
502-503. 514 



INDEX 


708 

Asturae (Astura), 162 
Atalanta, 256 

Atargatds (dea Syria), 390, 522 
Atella (Aversa), 237 
Athanasius, St., Greek father of the Church 
(296P-373), 660, 663 

atheism, in Lucretius, 147-154; 3^8, 485. 49 »« 
497. 5^^ 

Athenaeum, 415 

Athenaeus of Naucratis, Greek grammarian 
(fl. 3rd century), 325, 334, 635-636 
Athenagoras, Greek philosopher (fl. 168), 611 

Athene, see Pallas Athene 
Athenion, leader of slave rebellion (?-ioi 
B.C.), 121' 

Athenodorus Cananites of Tarsus, Greek 
Stoic philosopher (fl. ist century b.c.), 228 
Athens, 13, 40, 68, 79, 87, 95, 96, 98, 99, 100, 
104, 123, 124, 131, 141, 186, 203, 2O5,-207, 228, 
234, 239, 244, 254, 300, 325, 349, 368, 389, 418, 
428, 431, 432, 462, 465, 466, 482, 483, 484, 486, 
487-490, 495, 504, 514, 515, 519, 520. 534. 546. 
579, 583-584, 585, 604*, 621, 630, 661 
athletics, in Etruria, 7; under Rome, 72, 223, 
277-279. 3*4. 340. 35'. 3^0. 375. 377. 382,43°. 
438. 5 'o. 532. 625 

Atlantic Ocean, 175, 217, 252, 307, 325, 326, 
466, 470, 475, 514. 52' 

Adas Mountains, 464 
Atman, see soul 

atomic philosophy, of Lucretius, 1 50-1 54; 164 

Atreus, 293 

atrium, 343-344 

Atrium Vesiae, 359, 635 

Attalids, 516 

Attalus, King of Perganum (reigned 241-197 
B.C.), 94 

Attalus III Philometor, King of Pergamum 
(reigned 138-133 b.c.), 114, 516 
Attalus, Gallic Christian martyr (?-i77), 649 
Attalus, Stoic philosopher (fl. ist century), 
301 

Attianus, Caelius, guardian of Hadrian (fl. 

end of ist century)., 414 
Attica, 4, 487 

Attic Nights (Aulus Gellius), 442 
Attic style (art), 348, 349, 361, 635 
“Attic” style (literature), 161 
Atticus, Titus Pomponius, scholar and phil- 
osopher (109-32 B.C.), 130, 131-132, 159. '63. 
169, 189, 202 

Atticus Herodes, Tiberius Claudius, Greek 
rhetorician and milhonaire (104.'' -180), 487, 
5'5 

Attila, King of the Huns (4o6?-453), 670 
Attis, 94, 385, 523, 553, 588, 598 • 

“Atys” (Catullus), 157 
Aude (one. Atax), 470 
Auditoria, 312 

Augsburg {one. Augusta Vindelicorum), 324, 
480 

augury, 63-64, 93, 388, 435, 651 


Aiigustales, 226 
Augustaha, 649 

Augustan Age, 188, 211-258, 271, 295, 297, 338, 
361, 454. 533 

Augusta Rauricorum (Augst), 480 
Augusta Taurinorum, see Turin 
Augusta Trevirorum (Treves), 474, 635, 640 
Augusta Vindelicorum, see Augsburg 
Augustine, Saint, Bishop of Hippo and father 
of the Church (354-430), 42, 60, 307, 465, 
493, 494, 603, 606, 61 1 

Augustonemetum (Clermont-Ferrand), 473 
Augustus (Caius Julius Caesar Octavianus), 
Roman emperor (63 b,c.-i4 a.d.), in, 121, 
128, 154, 159, 199-258, 259, 260, 262, 265, 266, 
269, 270, 273, 274, 285, 286, 288, 290, 294, 299, 
308, 309, 312, 319, 323, 325, 326t, 331, 335, 
338, 340. 341. 344. 345. 346, 347. 348, 35°. 35^. 
356, 357. 358, 360. 363. 365*, 381, 383. 387, 
388, 391, 394, 396, 397, 398, 407, 410, 411, 413, 
414, 417, 419, 432, 434, 454, 455, 460, 464, 465, 
469, 472, 473, 474, 478, 482, 487, 499, 508, 51 1, 
514, 516, 528, 530, 531, 532, 543, 558, 640, 645, 
663, 664 
Aulis, 149 

Aulularia (Plautus), 100 
aurea mediocritas, 245-246, 249 
Aureha, mother of Caesar (2nd and ist cen- 
turies B.c.), 167 

Aurehan (Lucius Domitius Aurelianus), Ro- 
man emperor (2i2?-275), 606, 628, 632, 638- 
639, 640, 642, 654, 664, 665 
Aurelian Way, 78 

Aurelius, Marcus (Marcus Annius Aurelius 
Antoninus), Roman emperor and philoso- 
pher (121-180), 13, 28,97, '°8, 159, 299, 322, 
329, 330. 331. 335, 346, 349, 39ti, 398. 4'^. 4“. 
423. 424. 425-432. 442, 443-446, 447, 448-449. 
460, 465, 469, 478, 480, 489, 490, 492, 495, 505, 
507, 606, 61 1, 622, 627, 631*, 633, 645, 649, 
650, 662, 665, 666 

Aurelius, Severus, brother of Alarcus Aure- 
lius (fl. 2nd centuiyri, 4:6 
Aurelius, Column of, 41 2, 443 
Aurelius imperator, 443 
aureus, 192 

Aurignacian man, 470-471 
Aurora, 241, 255 
Austria, 471 
Austria-Hungary, 480 
autobiography, Hadrian’s, 415 
Autun {one. Augustodunum), 175, 474 
Auvergne, 176 
Avare, L’ (Moliere), 100 
Avaricum (Bourges), 177, 471*, 473 
Av'cntine, 12*, 74, 81, 117, 339-340, 360 
Avemus, Lacus (Lake Avemo), 220, 240, 456 
Avignon (atic. Avenio), 417, 474 
Aviola, Marcus Acilius, consul (fl. 1st century 
B.C.), 31 1 
Aziz, 390 



INDEX 


709 


B 

Baal (Bel), 45, 390, 511, 606, 623-625, 639; 

Baal-Haman, 41, 42, 47; Baal-Moloch, 41 
Baalbek, see Heliopolis 

Babylonia or Babylon, 7, 9, 88, 133, 30S, 322, 
374. 538, 540. 546. 549. 588 
Babylon, whore of, 593 
Babylonian Captivity, 545 
Bacchae (Euripides), 178, 529 
Baachanalia, 94 
Bacchantes, 204 

Bacchus,94,i64,347,354,5n;ree also Dionysus 
bachelors, 68, 224, 237, 250, 363 
Bacon, Francis, Baron Verulam, Viscount Sc. 
Albans, EngUsh philosopher and statesman 
(1561-1626), 304 

Baedeker, Karl, German publisher of guide- 
books (1801-1859), 324 
Baetica (Andalusia), 216, 470 
Bagradas (Aledjerda) River, 39, 464-465 
Baiae (Baja), 133,135,185,266,370,377, 422, 456 
Balbinus (Decimus Caelius Balbinus;, Roman 
emperor (.3-238), 628 

Balbus, Lucius Cornelius, consul (fl. ist cen- 
tury b.c.), 191, 192, 195, 333, 340, 360 
Balbus and Ollius, banking firm, 331 
Balearic Islands, 40, 42, 470 
Balkans, 431, 483, 519, 630, 638, 669 
baUet, 378-379, 487 
Baltic Sea, 478 

Balzac, Honore de, French novelist (1799- 
1850), 412 

banking, 79-80, 88, ni, 130, 169, 323, 331-332, 
336, 499, 514, 515, 536, 671 
bankruptcy, 58, 79, in, 192, 331-332, 396 
baptism, 558,560,577,598,600,618,649,658,664 
barbarian invasions, 174-178, 188, 294, 406, 424, 
428-429, 431, 448-449, 480-481, 507, 627-633, 
638-639, 644, 650, 665-670 
Barcino (Barcelona), 470 
Bar Cocheba, Simeon, Jewish rebel leader 
(?-i35). 542, 548, 549 
Bardesanes, Syrian heretic (fl. 200), 604 
Barnabas, Joses, apostle, 582-583, 590, 603 
Basilica Aemilia, 92 
Basilica Julia, 267 
Basilica Porcia, 92 

basilicas, 92-93, 130, 219, 340, 345, 355, 362,465, 
466,476477480,5 1 1 ,60 1 ,6 1 8-6 1 9,66 1 -662 ,67 1 
Basilica Ulpia, 41 1 

Basilides, Alexandrian heretic (fl. 117), 604 

Bassa, 317 

Batanea, 535 

Bath, see Aquae Sails 

bathing, 81, 343, 344, 345, 459. 477. 

599, 624; see also watering places 
baths, public, Carthaginian, 40, 465; Roman, 
81, 219, 220, 277, 289, 290-291, 317, 327, 343, 
355. 356-357. 359-360, 362, 363, 374-376, 412, 
418, 440, 459, 460-461, 465, 466, 473, 474, 476, 
477480,509,5 u ,5 1 2,5 1 5,548,623,627,635,661 


Bathyllus of Alexandria, artist in pantomime 
(fl. end of ist century b.c.), 378 
Baucalis, 658 
Baucis, 256 

Bauer, Bruno, German theologian (1809- 
1882), 554 

Baur, Ferdinand Christian, German Protestant 
theologian (1792-1860), 553-554 
beards, 415, 471, 529 

Beaumarchais, de (Pierre Auguste Caron), 
French dramatist (1732-1799), loi 
Beauvais {one. Caesaromagus), 471*, 474 
Beersheba, 535 

Beethoven, Ludwig van, German composer 
(1770-1827), 381 
Behisnin inscription, 528 
Belgae, 175 

Belgica, see Gaul, Belgic 
Belgium, 36, 329 

Belgrade (awe. Singidunum), 480 
Bellerophon, 10 
Bellona, 62, 447 
Bellovaci, 471* 

Beloch, Karl Julius, German historian in Italy 
(1854-1929). 333. 364 
Benacus, Lacus, see Garda, Lago di 
Benedicta, 426 
Benefits, On (Seneca), 302 
Beneventum (Benevento), 37, 38, 78, 410, 440, 
455 

Cen-Giora, Simon, Jewish hero (fl. 1st cen- 
tury), 404 

Berenice, Jewish queen (28?-?), 288 
Berenice (Benghazi), 499 
Berkeley, George, Bishop of Cloyne, Irish 
philosopher (1685-1753), 310 
Berlin, 350 

Beroea (Aleppo), 512 
Beroea (Verria), 583, 585 
Berjnus (Beirut), 510, 511, 534, 545 
Bethar, 548 

Bethlehem, 535, 558, 663 
Bethsaida, 535 
betrothal, 68, 369, 374 

Bible, 539-542. 553, 555, 578, 598, 599, 606, 
613*, 614, 615, 616, 618, 658 
bibliotheca, 343, 344 
Bibliotheca Ulpiana, 635 
Bibracte {near Autun), 175 
Bibulus, Marcus Calpumius, politician (.^’-48 
B.c.), 171-172, 196 
Bilbilis (Bambola), 316, 318 
biography, 160, 269, 433-434, 442, 483-484, 635, 
662-663 

birth control, 56, 88, 90, 132, 134, 158, 193, 2ii, 
222-225, 232, 286, 363-364, 438, 483, 487, 505, 
606, 666 ^ 

bisexuality, 132, (Caesar’s) 168, (Antony’s) 
199, 246, 253, (Domitian’s) 290, (Martial’s) 
317-318, (Horace’s) 369, (Commodus’) 447, 
(iMeleager’s) 509, (Greek Anthology) 510 



INDEX 


710 

Bithynia, 55, 120, 140, 155, 157, 167, 170, 216, 
276, 366, 441, 516, 518-519, 521, 578, 630, 636, 
653, 659; Bithynia-Pontus, 520 
Bicuriges, 471* 

Black (Euxine) Sea {anc. Pontus Euxinus), 
112, 157, 194, 217, 232, 256-257, 275, 291, 329, 
418, 480, 483, 516, 517, 518, 520, 528, 629, 630 
Black Stone of Pessinus, 513 
Blandina, Gallic Christian martyr (?-i77),649 
Blissful Groves, 241 

Blossius, Caius, Greek philosopher (fl. 2nd 
century b.c.), 113, 516 
Blue Glass Vase, 347 

Boadicea or Boudicca, Queen of the Iceni in 
Britain (?-6i), 476 

Boccaccio, Giovanni, Italian novelist (1313- 

1375). 258 

Boeotia, 310, 483 
Bohemia, 406, 431, 432 
Boii, 49 

Boileau-Despreaux, Nicolas, French poet, sat- 
irist, and critic (1636-1711), 249* 

Boissier, Marie Louis Gaston, French histori- 
an, critic, and archaeologist (1823-1908), 441 
Bolingbroke, Henry Saint- John, Viscount, 
English statesman and political writer 
(1678-1751), 553 _ 

Bologna {me. Felsina, later Bononia), 5, ii, 
78. 455 

Bona Dea, 59, (feast of) 65, 172 
books, 158, 234, 267, 269, 333, 346 
bookshops, 234, 342 

Bordeaux (anc. Burdigala), 324, 470, 473 
Borgbese Gladiator, 453 
Borysthenes (Dnieper), 521 
Boscoreale, 346, 459 
Bosporus, kingdom of, 219, 413, 629 
Bosporus (strait), 483, 518-519 
Bossuet, Jacques Benigne, French Bishop of 
Meaux, and pulpit orator (1627-1704), 662, 
663 

Boston Museum, 259 
Bostra (Basra), 508,’ 535, 602 
Botticelli, Sandro (Alessandro Filipepi), Ital- 
ian painter (i447?-i5io), 354 
Boulogne (me. Gesoriacum), 324, 653 
bourgeoisie, 88, 89, 116, 171, 286, 343, 633 
Bourges, see Avaricum 

boxing, in Etruria, 7; in Rome, 90, 99, 377, 382 

Boy, 351 

Brahman, 610 

Brahmans, 526, 536, 608 

Brahmanism, 537 

Bramante, Donato d’ Agnolo, Italian architect 
and painter (1444-1514), 661 
bread, see grain 
Brenner Pass, 454, 480 
Brevity of Life, On the (Seneca), 302 
bridges, 17, 77, 176, 266-267, 324, 326, 336, 410, 
41 1, 455, 470, 473, 474, 627, 671 
Briseis, 354 


Britain, 40, 176, 234, 270-271, 288, 291, 302, 322, 
324, 326, 327, 329, 366, 413, 417, 428, 470, 471, 
472, 475-477, 479, 602, 620, 622, 633, 638, 641, 
651, 669 
Britanni, 475 

Britannicus, son of Qaudius and Messalina 
(42-55), 273-275 
British Empire, 406 
British Museum, 347, 350, 351 
Britons, 176 
Bronze, Age of, 471 

bronzework, 9-10, 18, 82, 227, 346, 349-351, 359, 
420, 443, 457, 459-460, 469, 510 
brothels, see prostitution 
Brothers Pettius, banking firm, 332 
Brumalia, 512 

Brundisium (Brindisi), 78,97,125,170,173,183, 
184, 200, 205, 239, 244, 325, 326, 410, 455, 602 
Bruttians, 35, 37, 51 
Bruttium, 53 

Brutus, Decimus Junius, commander (?-43 
B.C.), 177, 197, 200, 201 

Brutus, Lucius Junius (fl. 6th century b.c.), 
consul, 16, 17, 196, 197 

Brutus, Marcus Junius, politician (85-42 
B.C.), 130, 161, 185-186, 189, 194, 196-204, 
21 1, 244, 426, 448, 482, 484, 513, 583 
Brutus (in Martial), 318 
Bubastis, 498 
Budapest, 480 
Buddhism, 537, 559 

building materials, 356-357, 420, 477, 533, 635 
building trades, 322 
Bulgaria, 480 

bullfights, in Etruria, 6; in Crete and Thes- 
saly, 384; in Rome, 385 

bureaucracy, 191, 215, 220, 270-271, 275, 409, 
416, 448, 498, 640, 642-645, 665, 668 
Burgundy, 473 

Burrus, prefect of the Praetorian Guard (fl. 

ist century), 273, 275, 276 
Bury, John Bagnell, Irish historian (1861- 

1927). 273* 

business, see trade 
buttress, 635, 661 
Byblus, 39, 534 

Byron, George Gordon, sixth Baron, English 
poet (1788-1824), 249* 

Byrsa, 41, 465 
Bj-zantine Empire, 419, 641 
Byzantinism, 641 

C 

Cabala, 538 

Cabillonum (Chalon-sur-Saone), 474 
Cadiz, see Gades 
Cadmea, 483 

Caecilius (in Octavius, by Minucius Felix), 61 1 
Caecilius Statius, comic dramatist (.2-168 B.c.), 

lOI 

Caelian hill, 12*, 340, 361 



INDEX 


Caelius, Marcus Caius Rufus, orator (fl. ist 
century b.c.), 135, 155, 184, 188-189 
Caenis, mistress of Vespasian (ist century), 
288 

Caepiones, Roman family, 76 
Caere (Cervetri), 7, 8, 10, ii, 121 
Caesar, Caius Julius, Roman general, states- 
man, and historian (100-44 B-c.), 3, 23, 27, 
31, 34, 48, 66, 70, 73, 102, 1 16, 1 18, 119, 123, 
128, 129, 133, 134, 136, 139, 140, 143, J44, 145, 
146, 147, 155, 159, 160, 161, 162, 163, 165, 166, 
167-202, 204, 205, 208, 211, 212, 213, 219, 223, 
226, 227, 228, 229, 231, 233, 242, 236, 260, 

270, 271, 283, 291, 293, 296, 303, 312, 319, 

323, 324. 326, 329- 330. 335 . 340. 34 t. 34 * 5 . 

349 . 350. 354 . 356, 360, 361, 364, 363, 372, 

383. 383. 386, 391, 392, 400, 412, 414, 419, 

431. 448, 436, 437, 462, 463, 466, 469, 471-476, 
482. 487, 300, 308, 314, 316, 323, 328, 537*, 
362, 638, 641, 634 

Caesarea (Kaisaria), 308, 334, 333, 344, 377, 
386, 613, 662 

Caesarea (Cherchel), 466 
Caesarean birth, 167 

Caesarea Phihppi, or Paneas (Banias), 343, 369 
Caesarion, Egyptian prince, son of Cleopatra 
47-30 B.C.), 188, 189, 193, 206, 208 
Caesarodunum (Tours), 474 
Caesars, the, 173, 362, 460, 393 
Caesonia, fourth wife of Caligula (?-4i ajj.), 
266, 268 

Caiaphas, Jewish high priest (£ 1 . 18-36), 371 
Cairo, 330 

Caius Caesar, grandson of Augustus (?-4 aj).), 
230-231, 473 

Calagurris (Calahorra), 313 
Caledonia, see Scotland 
calendar, Roman, 66-67, 75 . ^ 93 '< Julian, 193; 
Druidic, 472 

Calidus, Quintus, politician (fl. ist century 
B.C.), 129 

Caligula (Caius Caesar Germanicus), Roman 
emperor (12-41), 264-268, 269, 270, 273, 279, 
- 93 . 300, 301, 304, 344, 343, 363*, 378, 380, 

384, 388, 390, 434, 436, 466, 482, 300, 301, 343 
Callimachus, Greek grammarian and poet 

(320-?— 240-? B.C.), 133, 138, 636 
Calhstus, Roman Pope (reigned 217-222), 617- 
618 

Calhstus, secretary of Claudius (fl. ist cen- 
tuiy’), 270 

Calpumia, last wife of Caesar (ist cenmry 
B.C.), 172, 189, 193, 197, 198 
Calpumia, third wife of Pliny the Younger 
(ist-2nd cenmries), 440 
Calvin, John, French Protestant reformer at 
Geneva (1309-1364), 392 
Calvus, Licinius, poet (fl. ist century b.c.), 
146, 161, 174 

cameos, 346 

CamUlus, Marcus Furius, general and patri- 
cian leader (7-363 b.c.), 24, 36, 68, 120 


711 

Campiagna di Roma, 320, 631, 666 
Campania, ii, 18, 37, 62, 74, 77, 171, 713, 231, 
263, 303, 326, 328, 339, 346, 435-436, 608 
Campus Martius, see Field of IVIars 
Camulodunum (Colchester), 476, 477 
Canaan, 567 

canals, 77, 410, 464, 499, 300, 631 
Canary Islands, 308 
Candia, 247 

Cannae (batde of, 216 b.c.), 34, 50-31, 70, 71, 
86, 93, 164 

Cannus, musician (fl. ist century), 381 
canonization, 226 
canon law, 406, 619 
Canopus (Abukir on site of), 300 
Cantii, 476 

Canuleius, Caius, tribune (fl. 443 b.c.), 24 
Canusium (Canosa), 31 
Capernaum, 563 
capital, 90, 323, 333, 633, 668 
Capitol, 36, 32, 60, 82, 83, 169, 198, 206, 263, 
280, 291, 358, 388, 419, 443 
Capitol, in Washington, 421 
Capitolias, 533 

Capitoline, I2*, 13, 36, 61, 81, 82, 316, 340, 
34 J. 358 

Capitoline games, 291, 381 
Capitoline Museum, 349, 331, 443 
Cappadocia, 140, 147, 188, 357, 366, 418, 462, 
490. 496, 313, 317, 320, 323, 524, 328, 578, 
629, 630 

Capri (one. Capreae), 263, 263, 344, 436 
Captivi (Plautus), 100 

Capua, II, 37, 31, 32, 78, 116, 137, 138, 181, 
194. 322, 346, 437, 346 

Caracalla (Marcus Aurelius Antoninus Bas- 
sianus Caracallus), Roman emperor (188- 
217). 33>. 375. 621-623, 632, 633, 634, 635 
Caracalla, Baths of, 373, 627, 633 
Caractacus, king of the Silures in Britain (fl. 

ist century), 271 
Carales (Cagliari), 464 
Career Tulliamim, 404 
Care of the Hair, On the (Domitian), 289 
Caria, 513, 314, 318 
carmen saeciilare, 223, 248, 380 
Cameades, Greek philosopher and orator 
(213-129 B.C.), 93-^, 489, 497 
Camutes, 471* 

Carpathian Mountains, 431 
Carrara, 10, 357, 434 
Carrhae (Harran), 131, 178. 529, 623 
Carrinas Secundus, rhetorician (fl. ist century 
A.D.), 267 

Carteia (Algeciras), 470 
Carthage, 23, 34, 38, 39-34, 37, 70, 76, 77, 80, 
82, 85, 86, 87, 88, 91, loi, 105-108, 1 16, 1 17, 

1 18, 192, 194, 240, 269, 326, 332, 418, 454, 
463, 466, 467, 468, 469, 472, 482, 346, 603, 
612, 613, 617, 633, 649, 650, 671 
Carthage, Council of, 618 



INDEX 


712 

Casanova de Seingalt, Giovanni Jacopo, 
Italian adventurer (1725-1798), 487 
Casinum, 461 
Caspian Sea, 528 

Cassius, Avidius, general and rebel (fl. 2nd 
century), 428, 431 

Cassius, Spurius, consul (P-486 b . c .), 23 
Cassius Longinus, Caius, general and con- 
spirator (P-42 B.C.), 168, 186, 194, 196-204, 
211, 448 

Cassius Longinus Varus, Caius, governor (fl. 
1st century b.c.), 137 

Cassivelaunus, British chief (fl. ist century 
B.C.), 176 

Castel Gandolfo, ii 
Castor, 35, 62 

Castor and Pollux, Temple of, 268, 358, 359 
castration, see emasculation 
catacombs, 60 1 
Catana (Catania), 66, 464 
Catechetical School, 613, 614 
Catholicae Ecclesiae Unitate, De (St. Cy- 
prian), 618 

Catiline (Lucius Sergius Catilina), conspira- 
tor (108P-62 B.C.), 126, 142-144, i47» id8, 
i(^, 170, 172, 184, 189, 202, 395 
Catiline (Sallust), 160 

Cato, Marcus Porcius (the Elder), general 
and patriot (234-149 b.c.), 4, 68, 69, 70, 73, 
87, 88-90, 91, 92, 93, 95, 96, 97, 102-105, 
106-108, 136, 160, 238, 312, 315, 370, 396, 

399. 4‘5. 454. 456, 618 

Cato, Marcus Porcius, son of Cato Uncensis 
(P-42 B.C.), 190, 203 

Cato Uticensis, Marcus Porcius (the 
Younger), philosopher and patriot (95-46 
B.C.), 56, 75, 108, 131, 133, 134, 135-136, 144- 
145, 168, 171, 173, 174, 180, i8i, 183, 186, 
189-190, 195, 196, 203, 282, 296, 426 
Catoptrica (Hero), 504 

cattle raising, 104, 131, 238, 319-321, 455, 464, 
478, 483, 513 

Catullus, Caius Valerius, poet (87-54 b.c.), 69, 
102, 135, 154, 155-158, 174. Z25, 235 
Catulus, Quintus Lutatius, aristocratic leader 
(fl. 1st century b.c.), 145, 146 
Caucasus, 329, 418, 517, 528 
Caudine Forks (battle of, 321 B.c.), 37 
Caunus, 518 

Celer, architect (fl. ist century), 345 
Celer, Asinius, epicure (fl. 1st century), 376 
celibacy, 132, 134, 222-224, 237, 250, 363, 524, 
526, 537, 566, 598; clerical, 6^j 
Celhni, Benvenuto, Italian artist (1500-1571), 

9. 349 . 

Celsus, general of Trajan (P-118), 414 
Celsus, Antichristian philosopher (fl. 2nd cen- 
tury), 559, 596, 606-607, 615, 616, 647 
Celsus, Aurelius Cornelius, writer on science 
(fl. 1st century), 295, 308, 313 
Celtiberians, 87 
Celtic languages, 73, 477 


Celts, 36, 49, 118-120, 126, 174-177, 235, 468, 
471, 472. 475. 477 
cena, 70 

Cenabum (Orleans), 177, 474 
Cena Trimalchionis, 297-298 
censors, 24,28,29,191,214-215,270,272,286,290 
censorship, 74, 99, 229, 300 
census, 193, 214, 333, 463, 558 
central heating, 343, 344, 477, 671 
Centum Cellae (Civita Vecchia), 410, 461 
ceramics, Etruscan, 9; Carthaginian, 42; Ro- 
man, 77, 322-323, 336, 346-347, 454, 473, 474, 

477. 498 

Cerberus, 389 
Ceres, 59, 62, 84, 164, 381 
Cervantes Saavedra, Miguel de, Spanish 
novelist (1547-1616), 637 
Cethegus, Caius Cornelius, conspirator (P-64 
B.C.), 143-144 

Cevennes mountains {anc. Cebenna), 176 
Ceylon, 329, 406 

Chaerea, Caius Cassius, tribune of Praetorian 
Guard (P-4t a.d.), 268 ' 

Chaeremon, Greek Stoic philosopher (fl. ist 
cenmry), 274 
Chaeronea, 124, 483, 484 
Chalcedon (Kadikoi), 133, 629 
Chalcis, 73, 483 
Chaldaic, 537 
Chaldea, 64 

Chalons-sur-Mame, 638, 670 
Champolhon, Jean Frangois, French Egypto- 
logist (1790-1832), 5 
Chance, 349 
Chariclea, 636-637 

chariot races, in Etruria, 7; in Rome, 265, 267, 
274, 278-279, 377, 382-383, 447, 465 
charity, 71 

Charmion, Egyptian handmaiden of Cleo- 
patra (P-30 B.C.), 208 

Charmis of Marseilles, physician in Rome (fl. 

ist century), 313 
charms, 60, 64, 388 
Charon, 387, 496-497 

Charondas, Sicilian lawgiver (ca. 500 b.c.), 32 
Chartres, 471* 

Charybdis, 602 
Chasidim, 536-537 
Chastity, 349 

Chatelet, Marquis du, Florent-Claude (1695- 
?>.,i35 

Chatti, 291, 428, 429, 431 
Chaucer, Geoffrey, English poet (1340?- 
1400), 258 
Chephren, 350 
chess, 375 

Chester {one. Deva or Devana Castra), 477 
Chichester (ojic. Cissaceaster ) , 477 
Chimera, 9 

China, 134, 329, 529, 669 

Chinese Wall, 669 

Chiusi {anc. (ilusium q.v.), 9 



INDEX 


Chloe, 247 

Christ, 72, 75, 154, 160, 235, 281, 347*, 390, 449, 
466, 475, 493-494, 502, 509, 510, 527, 529, 
535 > 537 > 54 i*» 550-619, 626, 646-664, 667 
Christianity, 63, 65, 95, i6y, 307, 335, 358, 404, 
405, 406, 465, 467-468, 489, 490, 493-494, 497, 
510, 520, 523, 524, 527, 538, 549, 550-619, 621, 
625, 626, 628, 635, 637, 646-664, 667-668, 
671-672 

Christians, 281, 292, 308, 365, 366, 386, 416, 
423>44^>447>507,529,554-6i9,626,646-664,665 
Chrysoloras, Manuel, reviver of Greek in 
Italy (i355?-i4i5), 96 
Chrj'sopolis (Scutari), 655 
Chrysostom, Saint John, Greek father of the 
Church (347? -407), 494 
Church, early, 557, 558, 575, 577, 588, 591-595, 
596-619, 646-664, 668 

Church, Roman (Catholic, 475, 554, 592, 617- 
619, 671-672 
churches, 662, 663 

Cicero, Marcus Tullius, orator and man of 
letters (106-43 B-c.), ii, 13, 14, 32, 68, 70, 73, 
82, 95, 96-97, 98, 102, 108, 1 1 5, 1 1 8, 128, 129, 
130, 131, 132, 133, 135, 136, 140-145, 146, 154, 
160, 161-166, 167, i68, 169, 171, 172-174, 178, 
179, 180, 181, 182, 183, 185, i88, 189, 193, 

• 94 , 195, 196, 197, 198, 201, 202, 212, 216, 

228, 258, 307, 308, 313, 315, 324, 325, 356, 

305, 368, 378, 379, 387, 391, 393, 398, 403, 

4 ° 5 , 4 I 5 , 439 , 453 , 454 , 45 * 5 , 457 , 4 ^ 2 , 4 < 53 , 

4*54, 489, 510, 5 « 3 > 5 * 4 , 5 ‘< 5 , 557. 57 z< 5 ^ 7 > 

012, 662, 671 

Cicero, Quintus Tullius, governor, brother of 
Tullius Cicero (ca. 102-43 B-C.),143*,I73 
Cilicia, 129, 139, 140, 167, 180, 196, 203, 204, 
^^° 5 , 378, 413, 500, 505, 513, 579, 629, 630 
Cimbn, 118-120, 472 
Cinara, 247 

Cincian law (204 b.c.), 32, 132, 402 
Cincinnatus, Lucius Quincdus, dictator (519?- 
439 ? B-c.), 31 

Cineas, Greek philosopher (fl. 280 b.c.), 28, 37 
Cinna, Helvius, poet (?-44 b.c.), 155 
Cinna, Lucius Cornelius, dictator (?-84 b.c.), 
123-125, 167, 519 

cu-cumcision, 530, 546, 548, 559, 577, 580, 582- 
. 583, 585, 586, 587, 625 
circuses, see games 
Circus Flaminius, 82, 340, 360 
Circus Maximus, 18,82,280,360-361,382-383,625 
Ciris, 270 

Cirta (Constantine), 105, 466 
citizenship, Roman, 25-27, 58, 99, 100, 114, 115, 
•i< 5 , ii8, 121, 122, 126, 182, 193-194, 216, 235, 
•70-271, 283, 394-395, 398, 460, 462, 473, 476, 
54 °, 586, 591, 622-623 

city-states, in Etruria, 6; in Greece, 6, 86, 482; 
in Latium, ii; Rome, 35, 81, 212; Tarenmm, 
4 ty; in the Roman Empire, 460-461 
Civilis, Julius, Batavian rebel leader (fl. 7 1 1,473 


713 

Civil War in Rome, 122-126, 168, 169, 177, 
180-208, 211, 220, 225, 252, 283-286, 293-294, 
296, 301, 514, 644 
chntates, 324 
clan (gens), 56, 69 

clan council, in the early Republic, 57 
clan name (nomen,) 56-57 
Clarissa Harlowe (Richardson), 637 
classicism, 249, 258, 302, 338-339, 381, 442, 635 
class war, in Greece, 86, 87, 482; in Rome, 23- 
•4, 38, 47, 51, 77, 108, 111-208, 242, 632, 633, 
656, 665, 668, 669 

Qaudia, first wife of Augustus (fl. ist century 
B.C.), 229 

Claudia or Clodia, Vestal Virgin (3rd century 
B.C.), 94 

Claudian Aqueduct, 270, 340 
Claudii, Roman clan, 2 1 ,35,155,172,205,259,364 
Claudius I (Tiberius Claudius Drusus Nero 
Germanicus), Roman emperor (iob.c.-a.d. 
54), 216, 267, 268-275, 293, 295, 301, 302, 312, 
322, 326, 336, 350, 365*, 371, 383, 384, 390, 397, 
402410419,434,456466,473476,501,543,554 
Claudius II (Marcus Aurelius Claudius Gothi- 
cus), Roman emperor (214-270), 630, 638 
Claudius, Caius, naval commander (fl. 3rd 
century), 44 

Claudius Caecus, Appius, politician and writer 
(fl. 312 B.C.), 29, 32, 37, 77-78, 81 
Claudius Regillensis Sabinus, Appius, law- 
maker (fl. 450 B.C.), 23-24, 29, 72 
Qeander, Praetorian prefect (.>-190), 447-448 
Cleanthes, Greek Stoic philosopher (300.^- 
220? B.C.), 584* 

Cleisthenes, Athenian statesman (fl. 510 B.a), 
«5 

Clemency, On (Seneca), 302 
Clemens, Flavius, relative of Domician (?-95), 
292 

Clement I, or Clemens Romanus, Roman Pope 
(30?-ioo?), 588, 617 

Clement of Alexandria (Titus Flavius Cle- 
mens) Christian father and writer (i;o?- 
220?), 558, 6io-6ii, 613, 614, 616 
dementia, De (Seneca), 275 
Cleopatra VII, Queen of Egypt (69-30 b.c.), 
70, 168, 187-190, 195, 204-208, 228, 237, 247, 
329,344,347,512, 531, 630 
clepsydra (water clock), 66, 308, 356 
client es, 22 
climate, 455, 476 
Clitias, Greek potter, 9 
Clivus Victoriae, 341 
Cloaca Maxima, 81 

Clodia, wife of Caius Caecilius Metellus Celer 
(fl. 1st century B.C.), 135, 155-157, 172, 235 
Clodius Pulcher, Publius, politician (?-;2 
B.C.), 132, 135, 171-174, 180, 202, 219 
Clorinda, 637 

clothing, in Etruria, 6, 18; in Carthage, 40, 41; 
in Rome, 18, 70, 76, 89, 108, 132, 134, 215, 
223, 321-322, 328-329, 372-373, 624; in Spain, 



clothing {continued) 

468; in Gaul, 471; in Egypt, 4991 in Parthia, 

Clusium (Chiusi), 17, 36 
Clyde, 476; Firth of, 476 . 

Clytie, 35J 
Cnidus, 513 

Code (Justinian), 394, 406 
Codex Gregorianus, 634 
Coele-Syria, 204 

coinage, Etruscan, 6 , 17; Carthaginian, 40; 
Roman, 17, 78-79, 87, 192-193, 19s, 275, 291, 

329, 330-331, 346, 358, 372, 627, 632, 639, 641, 
656; British, before Caesar, 476; Pontic, 517 

coitus interruptus, see birth control 
Colchis, 413 

Collatinus, Lucius Tarquinius, friend of Sex- 
tus Tarquin (fl. 6th century B.c.), 16 
collegia, of priests, 63, 225; of workers, 80, 
128, 173, 192, 335, 371, 427, 627, 644; of 
physicians, 312 

Colline Gate, battle of (82 b.c.), 125 
Cologne (anc. Oppidum Ubiorum; later Co- 
lonia Agrippinensis), 175*, 176, 324, 408, 
479-480 

coloni, see tenant farmers 
colonization, Etruscan, ii; Latin, 12, 38; 
Greek, 35; Roman, 24, 38, 47, 116-117, 120, 
192, 194, 218, 410, 419, 4J7, 465 
Colonna, Piazza, 443 

Colosseum, 287, 289, 345, 351, 356, 361, 383- 
387, 455, 627 

Colossians, The Epistle of Paul the Apostle to 
the, 587*, 588 
Colossus of Rhodes, 514 
Columbus, Christopher, Genoese discoverer 
of America (i446?-i5o6), 308, 325, 329, 503 
Columella, Lucius Junius Moderatus, writer 
on agriculture (fl. ist century), 319, 320,473 
column, 355-361, 411-413, 420, 427*, 443, 453, 
465, 466, 474, 499, 500, 508, 509, 511, 512, 
515. 5*6, 513 > 661-662 
Columna Lactaria, 364* 

Comana Pontica, 517 

comedy, 73-74, 93, 95, 98, 99-102, 232, 269, 378 
Comedy of Errors, 100 
comites, 479 

comitia centuriata, see Centurial Assembly 
comitia curiata, see Curial Assembly 
comitia populi tribuna, see Tribal Assembly 
Commagene, 322, 495, 513 
Commentaries (Caesar), 146, 169, 178 
Commentarii (Sulla), 126 
commerce, see trade 

Commodus (Lucius Aurelius Commodus), 
Roman emperor (161-192), 214, 221, 323, 

330, 390, 396, 430, 432, 446-448, 505, 620, 622, 
632, 649 

communication, 271, 323-324 
communion, 525, 598, 599-600, 613 
communism, in Sattimia Regna, 61; 526, 537- 
538, 565, 576, 597, 604*, 605, 646 


Como (anc. Comum), 322, 368, 411, 439, 440, 
454 

Como, Lake (Lacus Larius), 4, 344, 454 
Compitalia (Feast of the Crossroads), 59 
Composite order (architecture), 338, 357 
Comum, see Como 
conciliutn principis, 215 
Concord, 358; Temple of, 24, 358 
concubinage, 134, 204, 222, 272, 288, 290, 300- 
301, 396, 423,516,529, 653 
confession, 525, 600 
confirmation, 600 

Confucius, Chinese philosopher (551-479 
B.C.), 567 

conquistadores, 600* 

conscription,34,5i,87,90, 111,114,118, 178, 179, 
182, 222, 429,482, 621, 631*, 647, 650, 667, 668 
Conservatori, Museo de’, 443* 

Conservatori, Palazzo dei, 662 
consolatio, 301 

Consolatio ad Helviam (Seneca), 301 
Consolatio ad Folybiiim (Seneca), 301 
Consolatione, De (Cicero), 163* 

Constancy of the Sage, On the (Seneca), 302 
Constantia, sister of Constantine I (2nd and 
3rd centuries), 663 

Constantine I the Great (Flavius Valerius 
Constantinus), Roman emperor (272-337), 

331. 349. 375. 426, 483, 607, 639, 643, 644, 
645, 653-664, 665, 666, 668 

Constantine, Arch of, 443* 

Constantine, BasiUca of, 661-662 
Constantine, Baths of, 375 
Constantine, Life of (Eusebius), 663 
Constantine, anc. Cirta, q.v. 

Constantinople (Byzantium, Istanbul), 95. 

332. 354. 406, 410, 412, 482, 483, 509*, 518, 
529, 622, 633, 640, 656, 657, 66t, 663, 670 

Constantinople, Council of, 615 
Constantius I (Flavius Valerius Constandus 
Chlorus), Roman emperor (reigned 305- 
306), 635, 640-641, 644, 651, 653, 655 
constitudon of Rome, 670; under the Re- 
public, 25-35, 5V >14. 123. 125, 126, 139, 174; 
under the Principate, 212-217, 285, 292, 391 
consulship, 23-25, 27, 29-31, 34, 126, 180-181, 
191, 213, 216 

Contra Celsum (Origen), see Against Celsus 
contraception, see birth control 
contracts, in the early Republic, 57 
Copenhagen, 350 

Copernicus, Nikolaus, Polish astronomer 
(1473-1543), 502, 503 

Coponius, Caius, senator (fl. 1st century B.a), 
202 

Corbulo, Cnaeus Domidus, general (fl. ist 
centurjO, 271, 275 
Corcyra (Corfu), 383 
Corduba (Cordova), 296, 425, 470 
Cordus, Aulus Cremudus, historian (2-25), 301 
Corfinium, 78, 122, 182, 184 
Corinna, 254-255 



INDEX 


Corinth, 87, 107, 192, 193, 194, 283, 332, 374, 
383, 487, 546, 584-585, 602, 617, 630; Isthmus 
of, 283, 487 

Corinthian order (architecture), 338, 345, 355, 
357. 420. 427*. 465. 474. 5”. 533. 661 
Corinthians, The First Epistle of Paul the 
Apostle to the, 5^4, 580, 587*, 589, 591 
Corinthians, The Second Epistle of Paul the 
Apostle to the, 554, 587* 

Coriolanus, Caius (or Cneius) Marcius, hero 
(banished 491 b . c .), 35 
Corioh, 35 
com, see grain 

Corneille, Pierre, French dramatist (1606- 
1684), 302, 412 

Comeha, mother of the Gracchi (fl. 2nd 
centurj' b . c .), 113, 115, 117 
Cornelia, lex, 312 

Cornelia, sister of the Gracchi and wife of 
Scipio Aemilianus (fl. 2nd century b.c.), 
“3. 115 

Cornelia, second wife of Caesar (?-<58 b.c.), 
167, 168 

Cornelian Laws, 126 
Comelii, Roman clan, 21, 91, 364 
Cornelius, Roman Pope (?-253), 618 
Cometo (one. Tarquinii, q.v.), ii 
corporations, 78-80, 88, 340 
Corsica, 38, 40, 43, 46, 52, 301, 302, 463-464 
Coruncanius, Tiberius, consul (fl. 280 b.c.), 32 
Corvini, Roman family, 255 
Corvus, Marcus Valerius, consul and dictator 
(fl. 350, B.C.), 71 
Cos, 312, 329,504, 514 

cosmetics, 89, 187, 255, 329, 372-373, 465, 596, 
599, 624, 657 

Cossutia, first wife of Caesar (ist century 
B.C.), 167 
Costoboii, 431 

Cotta, Aurelius, political leader (fl. 241 b.c.), 

78 

Cotta, Lucius, friend of Caesar (fl. ist century 

B.C.), 197 

Cottian Alps, 454 
Country Life, On (Varro), 159 
courtesans, in Etruria, 7; under Rome, 62, 68, 
132, 138, 199, 204, 244, 254, 255, 366, 369, 636 
court life, 235, 303, 640-641, 643, 655, 661 , 662, 668 
courts, 129, 160, 180, 216, 220, 231, 261, 270, 275, 
340. 397-398. 401-403, 448 
crafts, 80, III, 243, 321-323, 333, 335, 338, 365, 
373. 479. 510. 513. 528, 536, 642-644, 671 
Crassus, Lucius Licinius, orator (fl. 1st cen- 
tury B.C.), 160 

Crassus Dives, Marcus Licinius, general and 
triumvir (112-53 B.c.), 126, 130-131, 137-139, 
168-169, 170-179, 192, 194,217,312,529,531,623 
Crates of iMallus, Stoic philosopher (fl. 2nd 
century b.c), 95 
cremation, 84, 232, 443, 472 
Cremona, 47, 87, 236, 285, 454, 461 


715 

Crescens, colleague who forsook St. Paul 
(ist century), 590 , 

Crete or Candia (anc. Creta), 17*, 55, 200, 
216, 505 

Crimea, 517, 519 

criminals, in labor, 78, 322; in games, 383-387; 

law and, 398; in the army, 665 
Crispus, son of Constantine I (7-326), 663-664 
Crispus, Caius, husband of Agrippina the 
Younger (fl. ist century), 273 
Critolaus, Greek philosopher (fl. 2nd century 
B.C.), 95-96 

Croesus, King of Lydia (fl. 560 B.c.), 516 
Cronus, 62-63, 588* 

Crotona, (Cotrone), 35, 37, 51, 363 
Cmcifixion, 555, 559, 57^-574 
crucifixion, 112, 138, 168, 281, 385, 397, 404, 
469, 543, 544, 545. 572-573. 578. 591. 606, 652 
Ctesiphon, 413, 428, 528, 529, 531, 602, 605, 622 
Cuba, 59 

cults, see religion 

culture, Itahan, 3-5; Villanovan, 5; Etruscan, 
5-1 1, 17-18, 36; Celtic, 36; Latin, 38; Car- 
thaginian, 40-42; Greek, 95, 96; German, 
479; under the Republic, 75, 177; under the 
Principate, 234-235, 287, 311, 379, 419-420, 
449, 455. 459. 461. 474. 47®. 481. 625; under 
the monarchy, 661, 666-667; of Rome, 670- 
672 

Cumae, 17, 35, 37, 64, 73, 113, 121, 126, 240, 
346. 347, 456 
cuneiform, 529 
Cupid, 255, 352-353, 468 
Curio, Caius Scribonius, orator and consul 

(.5-53 B.C.), 168 

Curio, Caius Scribonius, general (?-49 b.c.), 
133, 168, 181, 183, 361 

Curius, Marcus Dentatus, hero and consul 
(fl. 275 B.C.), 71 

currency, see mediums of exchange 
cursus hojionnn, 28-29, ^3*^ 
cursus pnbliciis, see post 
Curtius, Marcus, legendary hero, 64 
Cutilia, Lake (Pozzo di Ratignano), 288 
Cybele, 94, 157, 276, 358, 513, 523, 524-525, 526, 
527, 606; see also Magna Mater 
Cybele, Temple of, 358 
Cyclades, 519 
Cydnus, 204 

Cynicism, 136, 286, 292, 300, 489-490, 493, 509, 

537.657 , ^ „ 

C}'Tioscephalae (battle, 197 B.c.), 85 
Cynthia, 253 

Cyprian, St. (Thascius Caecilius Cyprianus), 
Latin father of the Church and Bishop of 
Carthage (200?-258), 603, 613, 617, 618, 650, 
657. 665 

Cyprus, 173, 174, 196, 204, 206, 216, 310, 322, 
505, 5>3. 548, 582, 583. 630 
Cyrenaica, 40, 328, 364 
Cyrene, 200, 216, 413, 548, 559* 



INDEX 


716 

Cyropaideia (Xenophon), 636 
Cyzicus, 418, 516; Temple of, 418 

D 

Dacia (Rumania), 291, 322, 330, 366, 410, 412, 
414, 424, 429, 434*, 480, 632, 638 
Daedalus, 256, 352 
Daily Doings, see Acta Diuma 
Dalmatia, 217, 366, 455, 480, 629, 639, 653 
damage suits, 58, 396 

Damascus, 78, 320, 508, 51 1, 530, 534, 544, 577, 
581, 602 

Damis the Epicurean (in Lucian), 496 
dancing, in Etruria, 7, ii; under Rome, 83, 
135, 204, 266, 314, 354, 367, 377-379. 43°. 437. 
470, 500 

Dancing Faun, 459 

dancing girls {puellae Gaditanae),^']o 
Daniel, Book of, 539, 540, 541, 559, 564, 569, 
593 

Dante, see Alighieri 

Danube (awe. Danubius or Ister), H2, 194, 217, 
257. 291. 329. 410. 41 4 ' 2 , 414. 4 * 7 . 429. 431. 
432, 441, 446, 448, 475, 478, 480, 523, 606, 620, 
627, 628, 630, 631*, 638, 639, 640, 669 
Daphne, park in Antioch, 512 
Daphnis, grammarian of slave class (fl. 1st 
century b.c.), 334 
Daphnis and Chloe (Longus), 637 
Dardanelles, see Hellespont 
Dares, 382 

Darius I Hystaspis, King of Persia (558? -486? 

B.C.), 528 
Dark Ages, 470 

David, King of the Jews (reigned 1010-974 
B.C.), 534, 541, 557, 558*, 559, 569 
Dawn, 241, 340 
Day of Atonement, 533 
Dead Sea (ar}c. Lacus Asphaltites), 537 
death masks, 350 

debts, 184, 192, 213, 331, 399-400, 514, 536, 644 
Decapohs, 535 

Decebalus, King of the Dacians (?-io6), 291, 
410, 412 

Decemvirs, 23, 31, 399, 670 
decimal system, 75 

Decius (Caius Alessius Quintus Traianus 
Decius), Roman emperor (2oo?-z5i), 615, 
628-629, 635, 650, 657 

Decius Mus, Publius, consul (?-34o b.c.), 37*, 

*54 

Decius Mus, Publius, son of preceding, consul 
(P-295 B-C-), 64 

deforestation, 77, 270, 487, 665 
Deianeira, 354 

deification, 226-227, 256, 260, 266, 268, 269, 274, 
280, 291-292, 309, 316, 388, 430, 432, 523, 623, 
640-641, 646 

Deipnosophists (Athenaeus of Naucratis), 
635-636 

delatores, 262, 264, 269, 279, 289, 290, 292, 302- 
303, 438, 447 


Delia, 253 

Delos, 80, 86, 92*, 112, 139, 330, 519, 546 
Delphi (Kastri), 64, 124, 472, 517 
Delphic oracle, 64, 484 

Demas, colleague who forsook St. Paul (ist 
century), 590 

Demeter, 62, 5 ii ; Feast of, 525 
Demetrius, Cynic philosopher (fl. ist cen- 
tury), 300 

Demetrius, Bishop of Alexandria (fl. 3rd cen- 
tury), 615 

Demetrius, Greek image-maker (at time of 
Saint Paul ) , 5 1 5, 585 
demigods, 241 

democracy, in Carthage, 54; Cicero on, 165; 
under Rome, 34, 54, 91, 116, 122, 128, 136, 
160, 179-180, 208, 212, 251, 260, 335, 340, 395, 
406, 449, 460, 641, 670 

Democritus, Greek philosopher (46o?-362? 
B.C.), 150, 153, 164, 

Demonax, Greek Cynic philosopher (50-150), 
487, 490 

Demosthenes, Athenian orator and statesman 
(384? -322 B.C.), 95, 161 
dentistry, Etruscan, 6; Roman, 75, 313 
Derbe, 513, 582 
Deuteronomy, 536 
Dialogue on Orators (Tacitus), 433 
Dialogues of the Dead (Lucian), 496-497 
Dialogues of the Hetairai (Lucian), 495-496 
Diana, 61, 62, 63, 81, 389, 459 
Diatribai (Epictetus), see Discourses 
dice, in Etruria, 7; in Rome, 269, 375, 403 
dictatorship, in Rome, 30-31, 34, 119, 124, 126, 
128, 136, (Cicero on), 165, 179-184, 189-197, 
208, 213, 214, 645 

Didius, general (fl. ist century B.c.), 136 
Didius Julian (Marcus Didius Salvius Julianus 
Severus), Roman emperor (i33?-i93), 620- 
621 

Dido (Elissa), daughter of King Belus of 
Tyre, 39, 42, 240-241, 256 
Didyma, 514 

Diels, Hermann, German classical philologist 
(1848-1922), 504* 

Digest (Justinian), 393, 406, 409, 634 
Digesta (Salvius Julianus), 392 
di indigetes, 61; di novensiles, 62 
Dio Cassius, see Dion Cassius Cocceianus 
Dio Chrysostom, see Dion Chrysostomus 
Diocletian (Caius Aurelius Valerius Diocle- 
tianus Jovius), Roman emperor (245-313), 
359. 367, 375, 426, 474, 480, 520, 606, 622, 634, 
635, 639-645, 651, 653, 657, 664, 668 
Diocletian, Baths of, 359, 375, 635 
Diodorus Siculus, Greek historian (ist cen- 
tury b.c.), 42, 234 

Diogenes of Seleucia (the Babylonian), Stoic 
philosopher (fl. 2nd century b.c.), 95-96, 
491 

Diogenes Laertius, Greek historian of philos- 
ophy (2nd century), 635 



INDEX 


717 


Diognetus, Stoic philosopher (fl. 2nd cen- 
tury), 425 

Dion Cassius Cocceianus (Dio Cassius), Bi- 
thynian historian of Rome (155-240?), 14, 
24, 207, 212, 219, 225, 262, 267, 268, 272, 280*, 
290, 302, 414, 442, 516, 545, 548, 620, 622, 636 
Dion Chrysostomus, Greek rhetorician (fl. 
reign of Trajan), 408-409, 483, 486, 487, 488, 
500, 521-522 
Dionysian Artists, 80 
Dionysian cult, 94, 354, 458 
Dionysius, Bishop of Alexandria (fl. 3rd cen- 
turj'), 650, 651,666 

Dionysius of Halicarnassus, Greek historian 
54? -7 B.C.), 234, 513 

Dionysus, 62, 94, 204, 352, 353, 523, 525, 553, 
588, 595, 598, 605; see also Bacchus 
Dionysus, Theater of, 487 
Diophantus of Alexandria, Greek algebraist 
(fl. 2501,633-634 
Dioplra (Hero), 504 

Dioscorides of Cilicia, Greek writer on medi- 
cine (40-90 A.D.), 505 

Dioscurides, gem cutter (fl. reign of Augus- 
tus), 346 

Discourses (Epictetus), 490- 494 

Dispersion, the (Diaspora), 545-549, 577, 579 

Disputationes Tusculanae (Cicero), 163*, 454 

dissection, 313, 504, 506 

Divinae Institutiones (Lactantius), 662 

divination, see soothsaying 

Divinatione, De (Cicero), 163* 

Divine Antiquities (Varro), 159 
divorce, 69, 89, 134-136, 167, 223-224, 229, 230, 
254, 266, 272, 279, 370, 438, 479, 529, 539, 560, 
568, 590, 598 
Docetists, 605 

Dolabella, Cnaeus Cornelius, governor (fl. ist 
century B.C.), 169 

Dolabella, Publius Cornelius, consul and gov- 
ernor (?-43 B.C.), 188-189, 191, 200 
dole, see grain 
Doliche (Kakava), 390 
dome, 355-361, 420, 421, 635, 662, 671 
Domitia, wife of Domitian (ist century), 292 
Domida, Via, 473 

Domidan (Titus Flavius Domidanus Augus- 
tus), Roman emperor (51-96), 234, 287, 289- 
293, 311, 316, 317, 320, 336, 340, 344, 345, 348, 
351. 365*, 372. 390. 398, 399> 407- 41 1, 415, 433, 
434. 437. 440. 476, 490. 521. 52<5, 547. 575. 59^. 
647; Domitii, Roman clan, 284 
Domidlla, St. (? -100), 601 
Domidus, Lucius, pohdcian (fl. ist century 

B.C.), 174, 176, 184 

Domna, Julia, wife of Sepdmius Severus 
(’-217), 621-623, 635 
Domus Aurea, see Golden House 
Domus Flavia, 290, 316, 345 
Domus Gaiana, 344 
Domus Tiberiana, 344 
Domus Transitoria, 280 


Donar (Tor), 479 
Donadsts, 658 

Donatus, Bishop of Carthage and founder of 
the Donadsts (fl. 4th cenmry) , 657-658 
Dorchester (one. Durnovaria) 

Doric order (architeemre), 338, 355, 357, 41 1 
Doryphoros (Polycleims), 350 
dowry, in Etruria, 7; in Rome, 57, 68, 69, 89, 
134, 141, 167, 223, 230, 370, 396, 440 
drainage, 81, 103, 193, 326, 410, 454, 461, 466, 
473.511. 631, 639 

drama, 74-75, 97-102, 235, 255, 269, 277, 301- 
302, 307, 314, 378-379, 461; Horace on, 249 
drawings, in Varro’s Imagines, 159 
dream analysis, 388, 485, 507, 525, 621 
“Dream of Scipio” (Cicero), 165 
Drepana (Trapani), battle in 249 b.c., 45 
Drews, Arthur, German philosopher (1865- 
•935). 554 

drinking, in Etruria, 7; in Carthage, 41; under 
Rome, 65, 71, 88-89, 94, 123, 196, 199, 200, 
204, 220, 247, 263, 267, 269, 297-298, 320, 324, 
334. 342. 354. 372. 377. 4p8, 423. 447. 458. itz , 
562, 599; in Gaul, 471; in Germany, 478; in 
Parthia, 529 

dru^, 310, 3 1 2-3 1 3, 329, 342, 505, 506-507 
Druids, 472, 473, 479 
Drunken Satyr, 459 
Drusi, Roman family, 122 
Drusilla, sister of Csdigula (?-38 a.d.), 266 
Drusus, Marcus Livius, statesman (fl. 2nd cen- 
rary b.c.), 117, 121 

Drusus, Marcus Livius, statesman, son of pre- 
ceding (?-9i B.C.), 121-122 
Drusus Caesar, son of Tiberius (?-23), 263, 
264 

Drusus Senior, Nero Claudius, general, step- 
son of Augustus, (38-9 B.C.), 217, 229, 230, 
248. 259, 261, 269, 299, 323, 371 
Dryden, John, English poet and dramatist 
(1631-1700), 239, 671 

Duchesne, Louis Marie Olivier, French 
Roman Catholic prelate and scholar (1843- 
1922), 658 
Dura, 602 

Dura-Europus, 512, 529 

Diirer, Albrecht, German painter and en- 
graver (1471-1528), 580 
Duties, On (Panaedus), 97 
dyeing, 322-323, 329, 331, 342, 373, 471, 510 
Dyrrhachium (Durazzo), 184-185, 480, 482, 602 

E 

East, the, 78, 86, 94, 95, 12 1, 124, 125, 129, 138, 
139. 147, 154, 157, 161, 170, 171, 178, 186, 188, 
195, 203, 204, 206, 208, 213, 226, 251, 253, 262, 
292, 320, 323, 329, 330, 331, 335, 364, 373, 378, 
389, 406, 410, 413, 419, 420, 442, 455, 463, 471, 
482, 507, 511-512, 524, 525, 564, 576, 603, 605, 
616-617, * 521 , 622, 629, 630, 638, 639, 644, 651, 
655. 659, 666, 670, 671 
Easter, 617, 647, 66ot, 664 



INDEX 


718 

Ebionim , 577 
Eboracum, see York 
Ebro { one . Iberus), 47, 48, 215, 469 
Eburones, 176 
Ecbatana (Hamadan), 528 
Ecclesiastes, 540 
Ecclesiastical History (Eusebius), 649*, 663 
Ecclesiasticus, 539 
Eclogues (Virgd), 205, 236, 243 
Ecnomus (naval battle off, 256 b.c.), 44 
Eden, Garden of, 614 
Edessa (in Greece), 483 
Edessa (Urfa), 513, 602, 604, 629 
Edictum de Pretiis (Diocletian), 642-643 
Edom, 530 

education, Etruscan, 7; Carthaginian, 48; 
Athenian, 487-488; Roman, 70, 72, 75, 90, 95, 
137, 141, 217, 259, 265, 314, 367-368, 424, 440, 
477* 509-5”>5i3. 661,671 
education, state, 287, 368, 424, 461, 466, 476, 
661, 671 

effeminacy, 132, 215, 251, 438, 442 
Egeria, 13, 63, 365* 

Egnatia, Via, 324, 482, 602 
Egypt' 5- 6, 8, 10, 71, 77, 91, 92*, 107, 159, 168, 
170, 186-188, 193, 203, 204, 206, 207-208, 211, 
212, 213, 216, 217, 218, 225, 233, 247, 266, 284, 
301, 308, 313, 322, 323, 324 325, 327, 329, 331, 
336, 342, 347*, 349, 352, 355, 357, 359, 364-365, 
366, 374 381, 389, 390, 413, 424 429, 431, 437, 
482, 483, 484, 487, 495, 498-507. 508, 514 523, 
525, 526, 530, 532, 548, 559, 588, 595, 602, 606, 
613, 623, 630, 631, 632, 633, 634 638, 639, 641, 

653. 655. 657. 658, 671 

Egyptian, 187, 630 

Egyptian Tales (Heliodorus), see Aethiopica 
Eighth Legion, 182 
Edagabal, 62 1, 625, 626 

Elagabalus (Marcus Varius Avitus Bassianus 
Aurelius Antoninus Heliogabalus), Roman 
emperor (2057-222), 390, 622, 623-625, 626, 
639 

Elba, 6, 322 

Elbe (jTze. Albis), 217,432 
Elders ( presbyteri ) , 579, 582, 586 
Elea, see Velia 

Eleusinian mysteries, 418, 487, 525 
Eleusis, 431, 487, 525, 606 
Elijah, Jewish prophet, 574 
Elis, 482 

Elizabeth, mother of John the Baptist, 560 
Elizabethan Age, 258, 510 
Elysian Fields, 84 241 

emancipation, 57, 112, 221-222, 335, 363, 365, 
384 398, 631 

emasciilation, 94 157, 282, 290, 385, 512, 515, 
523. 567. 580, 613, 614 615, 625, 666 
embalming, 282 
Emerita (Merida), 470 

Emerson, Ralph Waldo, American essayist, 
poet, and philosopher (1803-1S82), 307, 367 
Emesa, 621, 623, 625, 638, 639 


emetics, 377 

emigration, 117, 118, 482, 487 
Emmaus (Kuloniyeh), 535, 573 
Empedocles, Greek philosopher (500-430? 
B.C.), 148, 153 

emperor-worship, see deification 
emphyteusis, 416 

Empire, growth of, 87, 95, 107, 108, 177-178, 
206, 217-218, 248 
Emporiae, 470 
Emporium, 339, 342 

Encheiridion , of Epictetus (Arrian), 490*, 494 
Encolpius, 297-298 
Encratites, 605 
Engadi, 537 

engineering, Etruscan, 6, 18; Roman, 75, 81, 
176, 193, 219-220, 266-267, 270, 326-328, 356, 
359-361, 410, 418-421, 464 465, 470, 473, 474, 
480, 5 1 1, 635 

England, 249*, 258, 302, 346, 406, 475, 535 
English, 671 

English Channel, 176, 470, 475, 476 
engraving, 278, 346 
Enna (Castrogiovanni), 112 
Enneads (Plotinus), 608-611 
Ermius, Quintus, poet and dramatist (239-169 
B.C.), 67, 97-98, 148, 155, 159, 164 234 241, 
315, 442,667 

Enoch, 574; Book of, 540, 541, 559, 564 593 
Entellus, 382 

Epaphroditus, freedman of Nero (fl. ist cen- 
tury), 284, 292,4^ 

Ephesians, The Epistle of Paul the Apostle to 
the, 587* 

Ephesus (Ayasoluk), 204 312, 329, 417-418, 
5 ° 4 ' 5 i 3 > 5 1 5 . 5 1 8,546,577,585,592,602,603,630 
Epicharis, conspirator (7-65), 371 
epic poetry, 74 98, 239-244, 278, 296, 316, 317 
Epictetus, Stoic philosopher (60? -120?), 295, 
301,307,415424425482486490-494520,611 
Epicureanism, 95, 131, 132, 148, 154, 164 236, 
249,304,370432485489-490491,496,602,671 
epicureanism, 68, 98, 147, 154 215, 230, 244 
^ 47 . 253. 260, 276, 279, 282, 285, 286, 300, 304 
373, 388, 456, 487, 522, 540-541 
Epicurus, Greek philosopher (3427-270 B.C.), 
95. 132, 148, 149, 153, 154*, 250, 304 305, 307, 
346, 388, 490 

Epidaurus, 62, 124, 139, 482, 487, 563 
epigram, 135, 155, 160, 174 234 247, 290, 295- 
296,302,3 i 6-3 1 8,369,3 89,398436,437,509-5 10 
Epiphamus, Christian writer (fl. 4th century), 
616 

Epirus, 37, 38, H2, 131, 184, 482 
Epistles (Horace), 248-249 
Epistolae Morales (Seneca), 304 
Epodes (Horace), 246 

equites (equestrians), 15, 21, 22, 24 26, 27, 32, 
80, 121, 126, 139, 142, 191, 286, 332-333, 363- 
364 384 433, 440, 622, 633 
Eratosthenes, Greek geometer and astron- 
omer (2767-195? B.C.), 521 



INDEX 


719 


Eretria, 483 

Ergotimus, Greek potter, 9 
Eros, 353 
Eros, 461 

erosion, 339, 487, 665 
Esdraela, 535 
espionage, Hannibal’s, 48 
Eshmun, 41, 42 
Esperanto, 671 

Esquiline, 12*, 215, 253, 312, 340, 342, 354 
essay, 24r, 304, 671; Cicero, 163-166; Seneca, 
302-304; Plutarch, 485-486 
Essay on Criticism (Pope), 249* 

Essenes, 537-538, 559, 560, 562, 568, 577, 597 
Etesian winds, 325 

ethics, of Lucretius, 148-154; of Zeno, 196; of 
Marcus Aurelius, 444-446; of Epictetus, 491- 
494; Jewish, 548, 591,618; of Christ, 566-567, 
602, 618, 667 

Ethiopia, 188, 217, 328, 364, 366, 500, 546 
Etna, Mt., 418 

Etruria (or Tuscia), 3-18, 35, 36, 37, 50, 51, 64, 
73, 112, 113, 139, 143-144, 269, 339, 350,440, 
454, 601 

Etruscan Federation, 5-6, 17* 

Etruscans, 5-18, 35, 36, 37, 52, 122 
Etruscan style, see Tuscan style 
Euboea, 73 . 3 10. 357 . 483. 5 '9 
eucharist, see communion 
Eucopion, slave, 334 

Eudoxus of Cnidus, Greek astronomer (409?- 
353? B.C.), 165 

Euhemerus, Greek mythologist (fl. 300 b.c.), 
98 

Eumenes 11 , King of Pergamum (reigned 197- 
159 B.C.), 516 

Eunapius, Greek sophist and historian (fl. end 
of 4th century) , 636* 

Eunoe, Queen of Numidia (ist century B.C.), 
168 

Eunuch, The (Terence), lor 
eunuchs, 329, 334, 363, 515, 624, 640, 666 
Eunus, Sicilian slave leader (fl. 2nd century 

B.C.), 111 

Euphrates, Greek Stoic philosopher (?-i38), 
422 

Euphrates, 178,194,217414495,511,512,513,627 
Euripides, Athenian dramatist (480-4^ b.c.), 
98, 154, 178, 258, 302,513 
Europe, 78, 86, 95, 132, 154, 166, 178, 308, 320, 
322. 324, 421, 475, 478, 497, 507, 524, 583, 640, 
641,653,655,664,670 
Eurydice, 94, 256 

Eusebius Pamphili, Bishop of Caesarea, eccle- 
siastical historian (2^? -340?), 501, 592, 
^49*. 651, 654, 657, 659-660, 662-663 
Euxine Sea, see Black Sea 
evil eye, 60 

evolution, Lucretius on, 150-153 
excommunication, among Jews, 547; Church, 
554, 605,618 
Exodus, 567 


expansion, see Empire, growth of 
ExPonto (Ovid), 257-258 
extreme unction, 600 

F 

Fabia, third wife of Ovid (fl. 1st century), 
256, 257, 258 
Fabian strategy, 50, 185 
Fabii, Roman clan, 21, 76, 255, 364 
Fabius (Quintus Fabius Maximus Verrucosus, 
Cunctator), general and dictator (?-203 
B.C.), 50, 68 

Fabius Pictor, Caius, painter (fl. 303 b.c.), 82, 

Fabius Pictor, Quintus, general and historian 
(fl. end of 3rd century B.C.), 71, 73 
Fabricius, Pons, 327 
Fabulina, 59 

factories, 321-323, 333, 342, 477, 498, 642, 644 
fairs, 78, 328 

Faith, 358; Temple of, 358 
Falemian wine, 456 

family, in Etruria, 7; in Germany, 479; in early 
Rome, 56-59, 67, 72, 88, 91; in the later Re- 
public, 134, 147; under the Principate, 222- 
225. 300, 321, 334, 348, 363-364, 366, 371, 441; 
under the monarchy, 656 
family name {cognomen'), 56-37 
Fannia, wife of Helvidius Priscus (ist cen- 
tury). 371. 441 

Far East, 84, 529 
Famese Bull, 634 

Famese Hercules (Glycon) , 349, 634 
Famese Juno, 349 
Famese Palace, 351 
Fasti (Ovid), 256-257 
Fate, 242, 304 

father, the (paterfamilias), in the Republic, 
56, 57, 59, 68-69, under the Principate 
and Empire, 395 

Fathers of the Church, 308, 524, 603, 611-615 
Fato, De (Cicero), 163* 

Faunus, 59, 65 

Fausta, second wife of Constantine I (4th cen- 
tury), 663-664 

Faustina Senior, wife of Antoninus Pius (2nd 
century), 423, 427, 430 

Faustina Junior, wife of Marcus Aurelius (?- 
173). 423. 425. 427-428, 430, 442 
Faventia (Faenze),455 

Favorinus of Gaul, philosopher at Hadrian’s 
court (fl. 2nd century), 367, 415 
feasting, Etruscan, 6, 7; Carthaginian, 41; 
under Rome, 65-66, 68, 69, 71, 82, 88-89, 9 °. 
132, 133, 147, t86, 190, 202, 223, 245, 266, 276, 
285, 296, 297-298, 334, 335, 372, 376-377. 386, 
4 < 5 l 476,515. 562, 624 
Feast of Tabernacles, 65 
Febris, 75 
februa, 67 



INDEX 


720 

Felix, Antonius, procurator of Judea (fl. ist 
century ajj.), 271, 543, 586 
Feralia, 65 

feriae (holy days), 65 
Ferrara (anc. Forum Alien!), 454 
Ferrero, GugUelmo, Italian historian (b. 
1872), 273* 

fertihty, 56, 59, 60, 61, 65, 66, 67, 159, 193, 212, 
221-222, 224-225, 232, 363-366, 431, 449, 479, 
480-481, 515, 525, 545, 666 
fertilizers, 76, 320-321 

festivals, 59, 63, 65-67, 71, 74, 76, 98, 223, 225- 
226, 239, 256, 334, 335, 347, 377-379, 381, 390, 
423,461484,512,515,523,542-543,579,598,672 
Festus, procurator of Judea (fl. 62), 543, 586 
jetiales, 63 
fetishism, 60 
feudalism, 631* 

Fidenae (Castel Giubileo), ii 
Field of Mars, 65, 128, 143, 173, 192, 232, 280, 
291, 308, 340, 348, 360, 362, 365, 390 
Figaro, loi 

Fimbria, Caius Flavius, politician and general 
(’-84B.C.), 124-125 

finance, 190, 192-193, 330-332, 336,411 

Finibus, De (Cicero), 163*, 165 

fire brigade, Crassus’, 13 1 

first name (praenomen) , 56-57 

First Principles (Origen), see Peri Archon 

fisci, 221* 

fiscus, 221-222 

fishing, 321, 33*5. 423. 47°. 483. 5«5. 520, 563. 573 
Flaccus, Avillius, governor (fl. 1st century), 
500-501 

Flaccus, Lucius Valerius, consul (?-86 b.c.), 
124 

Flaccus, Valerius, senator (fl. 3rd century 
B.c.), 102 
flaggelafion, 354 
fiemiines, 63 

Flaminian Way, 78, 455 

Flaminius, Caius, political leader (?-2i7 b.c.), 
47, 49, 78, 340 

Flaminius, Tims Quinctius, general (fl. 200 
B.C.), 85,96,382 
Flanders, 174 

Flaubert, Gustave, French novelist (1821- 
1880), 239 
Flavides, 291-292 

Flavian Amphitheater, see Colosseum 
Flavian Dynasty, 285-293, 351, 407, 412, 442 
fleet, see navy 

floods, 159, 193, 339, 365, 429, 649 
Flora (goddess), 65, 381 
Flora, courtesan (fl. 1st century b.c.), 138-139 
Floralia, 65, 378, 381 
Florence (one. Florentia), 9, 348*, 454 
Florus, Lucius Annaeus, historian (fl. ist cen- 
tury). 473 

Florus, procurator of Judea (fl. ist century), 

543-544 
flute, 379-381 


Fontana dei Trevi, 327* 
food, in the Roman army, 34; in Carthage, 40, 
41; under Rome, 38, 54, 70-71, 76, 88-89, *33. 
215. 227, 245, 247, 298, 320-321, 328-330, 373, 

376-377. 636 

forgery, in art, 342 
Formiae (Formia), 162,202 
Fornax, 59 

Forth, 476; Firth of, 476 
Formna Primigenia, Temple of, 454 
Formna Virihs, Temple of, 358 
Formne (Fortuna), 358, 388, 424, 655 
Fortune, Temple of, 340, 358 
formneteUing, see soothsaying 
Forum, 23, 24, 27, 47, 64, 66, 72, 79, 84, 89, 115, 
123, 125, 126, 136, 141, 146, 160, 161, 166, 169, 
179. 189, 192, 198, 199, 202, 228, 231, 239, 280, 
284, 340, 341, 342, 352, 358, 362, 378, 393, 394, 
402,421,423,427*, 429,635 
Forum Boarium, 340, 342, 358 
Forum Hohtorium, 342 
Forum lulii (Frejus),474 
Forum lulium, 192, 341 
Forum Piscatorium, 342 
Forum Traianum, 41 1 
forums, 464, 466, 473, 477 
fountains, 343-345. 348. 384, 515 
Fourth Gospel, see John, (Sospel of Saint 
Fracastaro, Girolamo, Italian astronomer, 
poet, and physician (1483-1553), 154 
Fragonard, Jean Honore, French painter and 
engraver (1732-1806), 351 
France, i74-i75,23<^3O2,3<^40647O-4754S4,67i 
Francis, Saint, Italian fotmder of Franciscan 
order (1182-1226), 455 
Frangois Vase, 9 
Franks, 175, 629, 653 
Frascati, 454* 

Frazer, Sir James George, Scottish anthropol- 
ogist (1854-1941), 588* 
free cities, 462, 474, 482 

freedmen, stams of, 270, 271, 287, 290, 292, 298, 
333. 334. 338.415. 543. 620, 639 
French, 73, 295, 475, 637 
French civilization, 177-178, 470, 475 
French Revolution, 192,641, 670 
frescoes, in Etruria, 10; in Pompeii, 74, 352- 
354; under Rome, 82, 338, 352-354, 372, 512; 
Christian, 601 
Freya, 479 

friendship, Cicero on, 165-166; Horace on, 
247, 250; in Rome, 441 
From Jesus to Paul (Klausner), 557* 

From the Pontus (Ovid), see Ex Ponto 
Frontinus, Sextus Julius, engineer and states- 
man (fl. ist century), 327-328 
Fronto, Marcus Cornelius, rhetorician (iio?- 
180?), 108,302,315,417,425,430,442,443,466 
Jrumentaria, lex, 116 

Fucinus, Lake (Lago di Celano), 193, 270, 326, 
410 

fuels, 76, 77, 322-323, 343, 477 



INDEX 


721 


Fufia Cantma, lex, 222, 398 
Fulvia, wife of Antony (?-40 B.C.), 202, 204- 
205, 206, 208 

Fulvius, general (fl. 3rd century b.c.)i 92 
Fulvius, Aulus, conspirator (ist century B.C.), 
395 

Funck-Brentano, Frantz, French historian (b. 
1 8(52), 475 

Fundamentalism, 592 

funeral rites, 83-84, 98, 101, 157, 180, 190, 
199, 232, 282, 335, 378, 379, 381-382, 568, 6ot 
furniture,88,92,i33, 303,345-346, 352,373459,532 

G 

Gabinian Law, 1 39-140 
Gabinius, Aulus, pohtician (?-48 b.c.), 139, 
172, 174, 186, 211 
Gabriel, 289 

Gadara (Katra), 297, 509, 530, 535 
Gades (Cadiz), 40, 1 33, 169,252, 325469,470, 514 
Gaiseric, King of the Vandals (fl. 429-455), 
670 

Gains, jurist (fl. 2nd century), 392, 394, 396, 
397. 399. 401. 405 

Galatia (Anatoha) ,86,2 18,5 1 3,578,583,585,630 
Galatians, The Epistle of Paul the Apostle to, 

554. 571*. 585. 587^ 

Galba (Servius Sulpicius Galba), Roman em- 
peror (3 B.C.-A.D. 69), 283-285, 323, 434, 436 
Galba, Servius Sulpicius, statesman (fl. 2nd 
century b.c.), 87 

Galen (Claudius Galenus), Greek physician 
(130-200?), 313, 334, 375, 428, 430, 505-507, 
513. 516, 599 

Galerius (Caius Galerius Valerius Maxi- 
mianus), Roman emperor (ca. 250-311), 
635, 640-641, 644, 651, 652, 653, 654, 662 
Galicia, Danubian, 432 

Galilee, 530, 535, 543, 544, 557, 558, 560, 563, 


Gallia Lugdunensis, 472, 474 
Gallic War, 169, 174-178, 179 
Galhenus (Pubhus Licinius Valerianus Egna- 
tius Gallienus), Roman emperor (reigned 
253-2(58), (5o8, 629-630, 635, 650, (566, 66 ^ 

Gal ho, see Novatus, Marcus Annaeus 
Gallus (Caius Vibius Trebonianus Gallus), 
Roman emperor (ca. 207-253), 629 
Gallus, Aehus, general (fl. ist century B.C.), 
336-337, 508 

Gamaliel II, Jewish Patriarch (fl. ca. 100), 547 
Gamaliel, a Pharisee, and president of the San- 
hedrin (fl. ist century), 576,579-580 
gambhng, in Etruria, 7; under Rome, 62, 269, 
383. 447, 456, 458, 488 

games, in Etruria, 6-7; under Rome, 82, 90, 99, 
III. 121, 133-134, 168-169, 171, 212-213, 219, 
220, 223, 224, 225, 260, 265, 270, 274, 277-279, 
289, 290-291, 302, 316, 319, 332, 340, (chil- 
dren’s) 367, 372, 375, 376, 377-378, 379, 380, 
381-387, 388, 389, 410, 415, 423, 427, 428, 438, 


443. 447. 45<5, 458-459. 4<5 i. 486-487. 5°°. 5i5. 
53^. 545. 598. 629, 631, 640, 646, 647, 649, 668 
Ganymede, 510 
Gard, Pont du, 474 

Garda, Lago di {anc. Lacus Benacus), 4, 155, 

158.454 

gardens, 76, 132-133, 141, 160, 185, 199, 215, 
245", 266, 272, 278, 280, 319, 327, 340, 343, 

344. 353. 354. 362. 421. 440. 454. 459. 500. 532 

Gargantua, 299 

Garonne (anc. Garumna),470 
Gassendi, Pierre, French philosopher and 
savant (1592-1655), 154 
Gaul, 43, 48, 53, 73, 89, 107, 112, 118, 119, 129, 
144, 167, 168, 174-178, 180-181, 183, 184, 188, 
191, 192, 217, 219, 231, 270, 283, 320, 322, 326, 
329. 330, 331, 348, 366, 417, 429, 431, 468, 470- 
475. 476, 478, 479. 481. 495. 5'3. 524. 602, 604, 
627, 629, 633, 638, 639, 649, 651, 653-654, 666, 
669-670 

Gaul, Belgic (Gallia Belgica), 176, 431, 433, 
472. 474 

Gaul, Cisalpine (northern Italy), 36, 47, 49, 
51, 87, 88, 155, 172, 174-175. 182, 189, 193, 
196, 200, 201, 235, 236, 454 
Gaul, Narbonese (Galha Narbonensis), 172, 
274-177.216,472,473 
Gaul, Transalpine, 49, 271, 454 
Gauls, 12, 23, 24, 35, 36, 37, 47, 48-51, 86, 124, 
130, 174-277. 192. 235, 271, 340, 375, 454, 471- 

475.478,513 

Gaza, 508, 530, 535 
Gazith, 536 

Gelhus, Aulus, Latin grammarian (ca. 117-ca. 
180), 368, 442 

Gemala, Lucihus, millionaire (fl. ist century), 
461 

Gemma Augusta, 346 

generalship, of Flannibal, 48-54; of Scipio 
Africanus, 52-54; of Caesar, 174-178, 182- 
189; of Antony, 199, 203, 206-207; of 
Tiberius, 217-218, 231, 259-260; under C^lau- 
dius, 271; of Marcus Aurehus, 428-429, 431- 
432; of Septhnius Severus, 622; of (Constan- 
tine, 6(64 

Genesis, 444, 540, 614 
Geneva, 175 

Genghis Khan, Asiatic conqueror (1162?- 
1227), 606 

Genoa (anc. Genua), 78, 454 
Geographical Outline (Ptolemy), 503 
geography, 220, 308, 503, 514, 520-521 
Geography (Strabo), 520 
geometry, 75, 314, 368, 503, ;(yj, 634 
Georgies (Virgil), 215, 225, 237-239 
Gerasa (Djerasch), 5(28-509, 530, 535 
Gergovia, 177 

Gerizim (Jebel et Tor), 535 
Germanicus Caesar, general (15 b.c.-aj). 19), 
224, 261-262, 263*, 273, 291, 301, 371 
Germans, 174-178, 217, 428-431, 434, 446, 475, 
478-481, 627, 631*, 639, 653, 666, 669 



722 


INDEX 


Germans, On the Situation and Origin of the 

(Tacitus), 434 

Germany, 36, 112, 118, 176, 178, 194, 217-218, 
231, 248, 261, 284, 285, 308, 320, 326, 329, 366, 
406, 410, 417, 424, 428, 430, 431, 432, 471, 472, 

473 . 475 . 478- 481. 633, 644; Upper Germany, 

291. 439. 479- 480; Lower Germany, 479 
Gesco, Carthaginian general (3rd century 

B.C.), 46 

Geta (Ihiblius Septimius Geta), Roman em- 
peror (?-2ii), 621-622, 634,635 
Getae, 257 

Gethsemane, 569, 571 

Gibbon, Edward, English historian (1737- 
1794). 364. 425. 613*. 662, 667 
Gibraltar (one. Calpe), 39,40, 43, 194 
Gil Bias (Lesage), 299 
Gilgamesh, 428 

Giorgione da Castelfranco (Giorgio Bar- 
barelli), Venetian painter (i478?-i5ii), 355 
Giton, 297 

gladiators, Etruscan, 7; Roman, 52, 90, 13 1, 
133-134. 137. 173. 179-180, 198, 223, 265, 267, 
^ 74 . 279. 303. 313. 351. 370. 377 . 382, 383-387. 
410, 428, 429, 430, 447, 453, 456, 459, 465, 487, 
532, 545, 622, 649, 665; schools for, 385-386, 

447. 505 

glass, 322, 328, 329, 342, 347, 361, 374-375. 456, 
473, 474, 499-500, 510; see also murrhme 
glass 

Glevum (Gloucester), 477 
Gloria, De (Cicero), 163* 

Glycera, 247 

Glycon, Athenian sculptor in Rome (fl. ist 
century b.c.), 349 

Gnosticism, 502, 556, 595, 604-605, 606, 609,614 
God, Seneca on, 304; Marcus Aurelius on, 
444-445; Plutarch on, 484-485, 486; Panae- 
tius on, 490; Epictetus on, 491-494; Philo on, 
50X-502; Galen on, 507; Poseidonius on, 514; 
Dion Chrysostomus on, 522; Apollonius of 
Tyana on, 526; Plotinus on, 610; Origen on, 
614-615 

gods, in Etruria, 7; in Carthage, 41-42; under 
Rome, 58-67, 69, 75, 76, 81-82, 84, 93-94, 104, 
164, 214, 225-227, 235, 238-239, 240, 242, 243, 
248, 251, 256, 259, 265, 268, 274, 280, 293, 300, 
316. 335, 340, 343, 349, 352, 371, 372, 377, 388- 
390. 427, 429, 430, 438, 444, 449, 457, 489, 510, 
512, 522-526, 557, 588, 601, 607, 625, 646-651, 
655; Lucretius on, 147-153; Cicero on, 162; 
in the Aeneid, 242, 243; Horace on, 248-249; 
Pliny on, 309; Sextus Empiricus on, 495; 
Lucian on, 495-497 

Goethe, Johann Wolfgang von, German 
writer (1749-1832), 354 
Golden Age, Saturn’s, 61, 225, 236; Augustus’, 
233-258, 346; Diocletian’s, 645 
Golden Ass, The (Apuleius), 299, 442, 467-468 
Golden Bough, 62 
Golden Horn, 483 

Golden House,28o,282,283,344-345,352,358,36i 


golden mean, see aivrea mediocritas 
Golden Milestone, see Millenarium Aureum 
Golden Thoughts (Marcus Aurehus), see 
Meditations 
Golgotha, S 7 t-S 73 , 581 
Good Goddess, see Bona Dea 
Gorboduc (Sackville and Norton), 302 
Gordian I (Marcus Antonius Gordianus), 
Roman emperor (158-238), 628 
Gordian II (Marcus Antonius Gordianus), 
Roman emperor (7-238), 628 
Gordian III (Marcus Antonius Gordianus), 
Roman emperor (226-244), 628 
Gospels, 553-574, 591 
Gothic architecture, 661 
Gothic letters, 479 

Goths, 316, 480, 622, 628, 629-630, 638, 669-670 
gout, 311,389, 622 

government, in Etruria, 6; in Latium, 1 1-17; in 
Carthage, 42-43; under the Republic, 21-35, 
57. 89, 93-94. 99. 113. 128-130, 136, 146, 17^ 
180-208; Cicero on, 165; under the Princi- 
pate, 212-217, 227, 266, 270-271, 285-294, 328, 
336. 338, 405, 415-416, 418-420, 422-424, 425, 
436, 447-449; under the monarchy, 623, 626- 
627. 632, 639, 640-645, 647, 664, 668-669; of 
Rome, 670, 672 

governors, 87, 129, 155, 174, 194, 198-199, 215, 
216-217, 261, 462-463, 661 
Gracchi, 23,47, 9L “i. 113-117, 122, 126, 140, 
165, 171, 192, 194, 319, 363, 391, 469, 516, 640 
Gracchus, Caius Sempronius, statesman 
(i 53 ?-t 2 iB.c.), 113, 115-117,465 
Gracchus, Tiberius Sempronius, statesman, 
father of the Gracchi (n. 2nd century B.c.), 
87. 92, 113 

Gracchus, Tiberius Sempronius, statesman 
(i62?-i 33 B-c.), 113-115 
grace, 589 

Graecia Alagna, 37, 38 
graffiti, 458-459 
Graii, 4 

grain, in, 116, 117-118, 120, 126, 139-140, 173, 
* 74 . * 79 . *83, 184, 186, 189, 190, 192, 212-213, 
r* 4 . tig, 220, 221, 237, 260, 265, 267, 270, 320- 
321. 325. 3^8-329, 333, 336, 339, 348, 362, 376, 
388, 411, 423, 427-428, 429, 438, 446, 453, 461, 
463464.483.498.513.631.633,641-642,666,668 
grammar, 29, 72, 95, 146, 234, 295, 308, 367, 415 
Grand Central Terminal (in New York), 
360* 

Granna (Gran), 431 
Great Exposition (Simon Magnus ?), 604 
Great l.eptis, see Leptis Magna 
Great Mother, see Magna Mater and Cybele 
Greece, 5, 6, 8, 10, 23, 34, 38, 47, 48, 51, 54, 57. 
62, 68, 70, 75, 76, 77, 78, 84, 85-87, 89, 92, 93, 
94 . 95-*t>r, 104-105, 108, 112, 113, 125, 130, 
* 4 *. * 47 . * 54 . *58, 163, 164, 173, 178, 183, 186, 
*87, 192, 203, 211, 233, 235, 239, 240, 241, 246, 
^56, 259, 269, 278-279, 282-283, 287, 311, 317, 
320. 323, 324, 328, 329, 330, 331, 333, 338-339, 



IN 

Greece (continued) 

342, 344, 347t, 349, 351-361, 364, 371, 379-381, 
391, 392, 406, 414, 419, 420, 429, 431, 442, 455, 

456, 459, 468, 472, 474, 480, 481, 482-527, 532, 
542, 579, 588, 594-595, 602, 618, 630, 633, 636, 
666, 667, 670-671; ree also Hellenistic 

Greek, 72-73, 95, 97, 104, 135, 141, 167, 187, 196, 
233, 244, 259, 269, 274, 308, 312, 313, 365, 393, 
415, 432, 440, 442, 443, 455, 479, 535, 556, 560, 
5<53, 571, 57^, 579, 582, 594-595, 59<5, 601,612, 
614, 634, 661; ree also Hellenistic 
Greek Anthology, 509, 633 
Greek Asia, 482, 486, 490, 512,518, 542, 630, 659 
Greeks, 4, 17, 18, 35, 37, 38, 39, 43, 44, 51, 52, 
58, 59, 62, 71, 72, 74, 76, 78, 82, 86-87, 89, 92, 
94-95, 99 , 104-105, 121, 132, 15-2, 164, 240, 242, 
249, 253, 255, 256, 263, 277, 311, 312, 326, 328, 
348, 352, 356, 364-365, 366, 367, 370, 388, 438, 

457, 468, 469, 480, 482-527, 529, 532, 535, 544, 
554, 558, 579, 582, 595, 634; see also Hellenis- 
tic 

Guadalquivir, 39, 470 

guilds, 499, 536, 642, 644; see also collegia 

gymnastics, see athletics 

gynecology, 313, 505 

H 

Hadad, 522 

Hades, 63, 84, 94, 240, 242, 389, 509, 525 
Hadrian (Publius AeUus Hadrianus), Roman 
emperor (76-138), 4, 220, 234, 322, 344, 351, 
359, 361, 368, 379, 392, 394, 395, 396, 398, 403, 
408, 41 1, 413-422, 423, 425, 426, 427, 428, 437, 
442, 454, 455, 476, 482, 487, 489, 491, 499, 512, 
516, 548, 549, 603, 624, 648, 662, 665 
Hadrian’s ViUa, 421, 454 
Hadrian’s Wall, 476, 524 
Hadrumetum (Sousse), 39,465 
Haggada, 547 
HaJacha, 547 

Halicarnassus (Budrum), 234, 513 
Halstatt iron culture, 471 
Hamburg, 553 

Hamilcar Barca, Carthaginian general and 
father of Hannibal (P-229 B.c.), 44-47, 48 
Hammurabi, King of Babylon (ca. 1950 b.c.), 

405,557 

Hannibal, Carthaginian general (247-183 B.C.), 
39, 47-55, 57, 70, 71,81, 85, 90, 91, 93-94, 105, 

1 18, 120, 121, 252,429,457, 469 
Hanno, Carthaginian navigator (ca. 490 B.C.), 
40,42 

Happy Life, On the (Seneca), 302-303 
harbors, 78, 193, 220, 270, 324, 325, 326, 328, 410, 
454, 455, 456, 465, 480, 483, 499, 508, 512, 513, 
5>4, 5'5, 516, 534 
harems, 199, 447, 517 

haruspicy, in Etruria, 7, 18; in Rome, 18, 60, 
63-64, 93, 164, 228, 651, 656 
Harvey, William, English anatomist and 
physician (1578-1657), 506 


EX 723 

Hasdrubal, Carthaginian general, son-in-law 
of Hamilcar (?-22i b.c.), 47, 48 
Hasdrubal, Carthaginian general, brother of 
Hannibal (?-207 b.c.), 47, 50, 52-53 
Hasdrubal, Carthaginian general in the Third 
Punic War (2nd century b.c.), 107 
Hasmoneans, Jewish family, 530-532, 536 
Hatra, 529 
Haverfield, 477* 

Head of Caesar, 350 
Health, 358 

Health, Temple of, 82, 352, 358 
hearth, 58 

Heath, Sir Thomas Little, English mathema- 
tician (1861-1940), 504* 

Heauton Timor oumenos (Terence), loi 

heaven, 241-242, 243, 485 

Hebrew language, 41, 501, 533, 535, 556, 579, 614 

Hebrews, The Gospel according to the, 616 

Hebron, 535 

Hecatompylus, 528 

Hector, 240 

Hecyra (Terence), loi 

Heiberg, Johan Ludvig, Danish classical phi- 
lologist (1854-1928), 504* 

Heine, Heinrich, German poet (1797-1856), 
72, 484, 583 
Helen, 256, 354, 516 

Helena, concubine of Constantius 1 (fl. 3rd 
century), 653, 655, 663 
Heliodora (in Meleager), 509 
Heliodorus of Emesa, Greek writer of 
romance (fl. 3rd century b.c.), 636-637 
Heliogabalus, see Elagabalus 
Heliopolis (Baalbek), 498, 511 
Hell, belief in, 8, 84, 147, 149, 241-242, 485, 542, 
561, 593-594 
Hellas, see Greece 

Hellenism, 37, 85, 92, loi, 108, 339, 367, 417, 

535. 549. 579-580 
Hellenistic age and culture, 78, 79, 84, 86, 92*, 
95, 96, 107, 113, 121, 125, 158, 233, 297, 323, 
339. 343. 344. 34®. 349. 35z. 37^. 4'9. 44^. 443. 
482-527. 530. 532. 534. 540. 576. 577. 579. 581, 
584t, 585, 594-595, 606, 630, 632 
Hellespont (Dardanelles), 124, 518,630,638 
Helvetii, 175 

Helvidius, see Priscus, Helvidius 
Hephaestus, 63, 352 
Hera, 418, 516 

Heraclea (battle, 280 b.c.), 37 
Heraclea, in Egypt, 636 
Heracleitus, Greek philosopher (fl. 500 b.c.), 
484, 502 

Heracles, 63, 226, 278, 385 
Herculaneum, 354, 456, 457-460 
Hercules, 62, 63, 286, 354, 447, 479, 513, 640 
Hercynian Mountains, 431 
Herder, Johann Gottfried von, German phi- 
losopher, poet, and critic (1744-1803), 553 
heresy, 577, 592, 595, 603-606, 612, 615, 616, 
6i8, 646, 657-661, 662, 664 



INDEX 


724 

hermaphrodites, 310, 334 
Hermes, 63, 352, 496, 525 
Hermogenes, Greek architect (fl. 2nd cen- 
tury B.C.), 514 
Hemici, 36 

Hero or Heron, Alexandrian mathematician 
and inventor (fl. 3rd century), 503-504 
Hero, 256 

Herod the Great, King of the Jews (62?-4 
B.C.), 487, 508, 512, 531-535. 536. 539. 542. 
545. 546. 557 

Herod Antipas, King of the Jews (fl. ist cen- 

tiiry). 535. 560. 568 

Herodes, see Atticus Herodes 
Herodian, Greek writer on Roman history 
(180-238), 620, 622, 628 
Herodias, wife of Herod Antipas (ist cen- 
tury), 560 

Herod Philip, half brother of Herod Antipas 
(fl. ist cenmry), 560 

Herodotus, Greek historian (4847-425 b.c.), 

454-455. 486, 513 

Heroides (Ovid), 256, 258 
Hertha, 479 

Hesiod, Greek epic poet (ca. 800 b.c.), 238, 
495 

hetairai, 7, 68 

Heywood, Jasper, English translator of Sen- 
eca (1535-1598). 302 
Hexapla (Origen), 614 
Hierapolis, 390, 490, 522 
Hiero II, King of Syracuse (3247-216 b.c.), 
44, 51 

Higher Griticism, 553-557 
Hillel, Jewish rabbi. President of Sanhedrin 
(60 B.c. 7 -An. 10?), 536, 538-539, 542, 547, 
567, 580 

Hunilco, Carthaginian navigator (ca. 450 
B.C.), 40 

Himly, Karl, German professor of medicine 
(1772-1837), 310 
Hinduism, 444, 525, 609 

Hippalus, Greek navigator (fl. ist century), 
3^5 

Hipparchus of Nicaea, Greek astronomer 
(1607-1257 B.C.), 503 

Hippocrates, Greek physician and writer on 
medicine (460-357 b.c.), 313, 505, 507, 514 
Hippodamus of Miletus, Greek architect (fl. 

5th century b.c.), 356 
Hippo Diarrhytus (Bizerte), 39, 465, 603 
Hippolytus, Christian schismatic (7-ca. 230), 
617-618 

Hippolyms, 254 
Hippo Regius (Bone), 39, 465 
Hindus, Aulus, Roman consul (7-43 b.c.), 201 
Hispalis, see Seville 
Hissarlik, see Troy 
Historia Augusta, 655 
Historiae (Tacitus), 434-437, 442 
Historia Naturalis (Pliny the Elder), 296, 308- 
3 ”.439 


Histories (Appian),442 
Histories (Sallust), 160 

historiography, 83, 290, 295-296, 500, 671; 
Varro, 159-160; Sallust, 160; Caesar, 178; 
Livy, 250-252; Claudius, 269; Pliny the 
Elder, 308-3 1 1 ; (art) Pasiteles, 349; Tacitus, 
433-437; Suetonius, 442; Plutarch, 483-484; 
Nicolaus of Damascus, 512-513; Arrian, 520; 
Josephus, 546; Dion Cassius Cocceianus, 
636; Eusebius, 662-663 

history (in schools) , in Carthage, 48; in Rome, 

72. 367 

History of Rome (Q. Fabius Pictor), 73 
Hittites, 513, 516, 528 
holidays, see festivals 

Holland, Philemon, English classical scholar 
(1552-1637), 167, 442 
Holland, 479 

holy orders, 600, 658, 66ot 
Holy Sepulcher, Church of the, 663 
Holy Spirit, 576, 582, 590, 600, 604, 605, 658, 660 
Homer (fl. 9th cenmry b.c.), 98, 147, 213, 241, 
242, 243, 254, 441, 495, 522, 614 
homosexuality, 65, 89, 94, 132, 144, 158, 167- 
168, 199, 237, 246-247, 266, 276, 279, 282, 290, 
297-298, 317-318, 369, 408, 438, 447, 456, 509*, 
598, 625, 627; see also bisexuality 
Homs {me. Emesa), 511 
honestiores, 332 
Honor, 358; Temple of, 358 
Horace (Quinms Horatius Flaccus), Latin 
poet (65-8 B.C.), 60, 61, 73, 95*, 98, 154, 155, 
158, 215, 224, 225, 233, 234, 235, 243, 244-250, 
252, 258, 367, 369, 380, 437, 455, 509, 546, 671 
Horatu, Roman clan, 21 
Horatius (Horatius Codes), hero (fl. 6th cen- 
tury B.c.), 17 

horse racing, 277, 377, 382-383, 500 
Hortensia, lex, 24 

Hortensius, Quinms, orator (114-50 b.c.), 13 i, 
13-. 136, 141, 160, 161, 185, 213 
Hortensius Hortalus, Quinms, noble (?-42 
B.C.), 203 

horticulmre, 308 
Horns, 523 
Hosea, 567 
hospitals, 312 

housing, 341-345, 362, 373, 465, 477, 510 
Huan-ti, Emperor of China (fl. 2nd cenmry), 

329 

Hugo, Victor Marie, Viscount, French writer 
(1802-1885), 249* 

human sacrifice, 588*; in Etruria, 7-8; in 
Carthage, 42, 465, 588*; in Rome, 51, 64, 65, 
94. 149; in Gaul, 472; in Germany, 479; in 
Antioch, 512 

Hume, David, Scottish philosopher and his- 
torian (1711-1776), 494, 609 
htmiiliores, 332, 644 
Hungary, 406 
Huns, 480, 669, 670 



INDEX 


hunting, 96, 321, 408, 414, 415, 423, 425, 428, 
430, 446-447, 478, 529, 531, 622, 630 
hydrotherapy, 3 12-3 13 
Hymettus, 322 

hymns, 73, 82, 226, 588, 601, 638 

Hypsus, Peri (Longinus), see Sublime, On the 

Hymn to Zeus (Cleanthes), 584* 

Hyrcanus II, King of Judea (?-30 b.c.), 530- 
531. 534 

I 

lamblichus, Syrian Neoplatonic philosopher 
in Alexandria (?-333?), 635, 636 
lazyges, 429, 431 
Ibena, in Asia, 413 
Iberians, 468, 472, 475 
Icarus, 256, 385 
Iconium (Konia), 513, 582 
Ides of March, 197 
Idumea, 530, 535 
ientaciiliim, 70 

Ignatius, Saint, called Theophorus, Bishop of 
Antioch (?-io7?), 588, 611, 648 
Iliad, 240, 241, 516 
Ilium, see Troy 
illuminated manuscripts, 662 
Illyria, 47, 51, 52, 200, 217, 454, 628, 638 
lOyricum, 639 
Imagines (Varro), 159 

immigration into Rome, under the Repubh'c, 
81,94,95, 121, 126, 179; under the Principate, 
221, 364-366 

immortality, 527; Cicero on, 165; Caesar on, 
170; VirgU on, 242; Horace and, 250; Seneca 
on, 305; in religion, 429; Tacitus on, 435- 
436; Marcus Aurelius on, 446; Plutarch on, 
485; Jews on, 536, 575; Christian, 592, 595, 
599, 602, 603, 656, 657; Plotinus on, 610 
impercnor, 191, 213, 268, 350 
imperialism, Roman, 54, 85, 90, 105, 107, 175, 
242, 252, 261, 409-410, 414 
impressionism (an), 339, 353, 355 
Inacha, 247 

incest, 172, 266, 274, 290, 495, 623 
Incitatus, 267 

Incrustation (First) Style (painting), 353 
indeterminacy, principle of, 151* 

India, 134, 325, 326, 329, 337, 338, 346, 413, 499, 
500, 508, 512, 514, 521, 526 
Indian Ocean, 325, 413, 499 
Indians, 600* 

Indica (Arrian), 520 
Indies, 503 

Indo-European languages, 73 
Indo-Europeans, 36, 60, 528 
Indus, 413 

Industrial Revolution, 477 
industry, Etruscan, 6; Carthaginian, 40; under 
Rome, 77-81, 88, 190, 310, 321-323, 328, 330, 
332-334, 336-337, 342, 370, 448, 455, 456, 457, 
463, 473, 477, 482, 498-499, 510, 529, 631-633, 
641-642, 644, 668, 671 


725 

infanticide, in Greece, 42; in Rome, 56, 222, 
363-364, 396, 434, 666; forbidden among 
Jews and (Christians, 546, 598 
Inferno (Dante), 8 
inflation, 211, 330-331, 632-633 
informers, see Delatores 
Ingenuus, ruler of eastern provinces (fl. 258), 
629 

inheritance, 57, (taxes) 58, 222-224, 245, 267, 
301,363,396,397,399438479, (tax), 622,657 
initiation, 524-525, 606 
Innocenza, 351 
In Fisonem (Cicero), 161 
“In Praise of Nero” (Lucan) , 296 
Inquisition, 649 
insanity, 312 

inscriptions, Etruscan, 5; Roman, 73, 271, 293; 

Pompeian, 458; Italian, 461 
Institutes (Justinian), 406 
Institutiones (Gaius), 392 
Institutio Oratoria (Quintilian), 314-315 
insulae, 341-342 

interest, 79, 88, 129-130, 131, 169, 170, 184, 192, 
211, 212, 219, 302, 310, 331-332, 336, 627, 657 
intermarriage, of Phoenicians with natives, 
39; in Rome, 221-224, 395 
international law, 48 
interregnum, 30 

Intricate (Fourth) Style (painting), 353 
invention, 287-288, 323, 328*, 503-504 
Ionia, 86, 125, 132, 133, 158, 204, 513, 314, 523, 
594, 629, 630, 636 
Ionian Sea, 206 

Ionic order (architecture), 338, 355, 357 
Iphigenia, 149, 353 
Iranians, 471, 516, 529 
Ireland, 36, 73, 471, 472 

Irenaeus, St., Greek Bishop of Lyons (130?- 
202?), 556, 611-612, 616, 617 
Iris, Egyptian handmaiden of Cleopatra (?- 
30 B.C.), 208 
Iron, Age of, 236 

irrigation, Etruscan, 6; Roman, 320, 464, 631, 
665 

Isaeus, Greek rhetorician in Rome (end of 
ist century), 368 
Isaiah, 540, 541, 560-561, 567, 574 
Isiac cult, see Isis 

Isis, 193, 266, 358, 390, 447, 467-468, 523-524, 
525. 5^6, 527. 596, 606, 635 
Isis, Temple of, 291, 358, 369, 390 
Islam, 606 

Isocrates, Athenian orator and rhetorician 
(436-338 B.c.), 103, 166 
Israel, see Jews 

Isthmian games, 85, 283, 486-487 
Istria, 73, 455 
Istrus, 480 
Italian, 73, 295 

Italica (Sevilla la Vieja), 414, 470 
Italus, King of the Sicels, 4 



INDEX 


726 

Italy, 3-5; city-states, 6; art, 10; Roman con- 
quest, 34-38; Second Punic War, 49-52, 54; 
, soil, 76^77; trade, 78; population, 81; music, 
82; northern boundary, 87; farming, 104, 
III; Celtic attack, 119, 472; Social War, 122; 
slave revolt, 137-138; troops in, 172; saved 
by Caesar, 177-178; supports Caesar, 182; 
chaotic state in 45 b.c., 190; citizenship, 193; 
Augustus in, 205-206; exhaustion, 211-212; 
agriculture, 237, 319-321; industry, 323; 
trade, 328-330; lack of grain, 336; water of, 
356; law, 404-406; plague in, 429; in the 2nd 
century, 448-449; under the Principate, 453- 
461; religion, 522-523, 542; barbarian inva- 
sions, 629, 638; economic and political con- 
dition under the monarchy, 632, 666-669 
Ithaca, 241 

lucundus, Lucius Caecilius, Pompeian auc- 
tioneer, 459-460 
lulus, see Ascanius 
ius civile, 393-404, 405 
ius gentium, 393, 404-406 
Ixion, 352 

J 

Jairus, father of girl awakened by Christ (ist 
century), 563 

James, Christ’s brother, 558 
James, son of Alphaeus, called the Just, apos- 
tle (?-62), 555,577, 583,597 
James, son of Zebedee, apostle (?-4i?), 563, 
577, 592 

James, The General Epistle of, 600, 6i6 

James 1, King of England (1566-1625), 555 

Jamnia, 535, 547-548 

Janiculum, 12, 340 

Janus, 58-59, 61, 67, 82, 358 

Janus, Temple of, 21 1, 285, 358 

Japan, 295, 374, 421 

javelin, 308 

Jeremiah, Hebrew prophet, 567 
Jericho, 535 

Jerome, Saint (Hieronymus, Sophronius Eu- 
sebius), Latin father of the Church (340?- 
420), 154, 392, 578, 596, 612, 614 
Jerusalem, 288, 349, 358, 365, 404, 419, 508, 530, 
531, 532, 535, 537, 538, 542-549, 558, 559, 562, 

569- 571, 574, 576, 577, 579, 581-583, 585, 586, 
587, 602, 603, 616, 650, 663 

Jerusalem, Temple of, 268, 349, 365, 530-531, 
533, 536, 537, 538, 539, 542-545, 548, 560, 568, 

570- 571, 574, 575, 577, 583, 586, 599, 603 
Jerusalem Delivered (Tasso), 637 
Jesus, see Christ 

Jesus, Life of (Renan), 554 
Jesus, Life of (Strauss), 553 
jewelry, in Etruria, 6; in Carthage, 41, 42; 
under Rome, 70, 89, 132, 134, 193, 215, 223, 
273, 328-329, 345, 346, 373, 429, 465, 471, 489, 
529, 578, 59<5, 624-625, 640 
Jewish Commonwealth, Second, 530 


Jews, 41, 65, 66, 192, 193, 199, 225, 288, 292, 
365-366, 390, 394, 407, 413, 419, 421, 423, 438, 
487, 500-502, 507, 512, 525, 529-549, 554, 556, 
559, 563-595, 598, 601, 614, 626, 646 
Job, 540 
Jocasta, 623 

Johanan ben Zakkai, Jewish rabbi (fl. ist cen- 
tury), 547 

John, St., apostle and evangelist, 555, 556, 559, 
56i-562,563,pi-572,575*,577,592-595,6ii,648 
John, The Epistles of, 557, 575*, 592; First, 575 
John, The Gospel of St., 502, 553, 559, 561-562, 
565, 570, 5717572, 575*, 592-595, 603 
John the Baptist, 558, 560-561, 562, 563, 564, 
568, 569, 570 

John the Elder, early Christian, 555 
joint-stock companies, 79-80, 323 
Joppe or Joppa (Jaffa), 508, 535, 577 
Jordan, 535, 560, 577 
Joseph, Cluist’s brother, 558 
Joseph, husband of Mary, mother of Christ, 
559 

Josephus, Flavius, Jewish historian (37-95.2), 
325, 498, 500, 531, 536, 537, 538, 543, 544-545, 
546, 554, 558, 560 
Joshua, son of Sirach, 539 
Jotopata, 544 
Jove, see Jupiter 

Juba I, King of Numidia (2-46 b.c.), 189, 466 
Juba II, King of Numidia and historian (. 2 - 
ca. 19 A.D.), 42, 466 

Judah, Jewish Patriarch (fl. ca. 200), 547 
Judaism, 63, 366, 501-502, 529, 549, 575-595, 
597-599, 601, 602, 604-605, 606, 614, 625, 626 
Judas, Christ’s brother, 558 
Judas the Gaulonite, Jewish rebel leader (fl. 

beginning of ist century), 543 
Judas Iscariot (of Kerioth) apostle, 563-564, 

571 

Judea, 140, 203, 204, 268, 281, 283, 285, 390, 
508, 530-549, 557, 558, 560, 5^, 570, 577, 618 
Judgment, Last, 243, 542, 553, 559, 560, 563, 

567, 593-594, 595, 597, 599, 603, 607, 612 
Jugurtha, King of Numidia (.2-104 b.c.), 118- 
119, 404 

Jugurthine War, 118-119 
Jugurthine War (Sallust), 160 
Julia, sister of Caesar (ist century b.c.), 200 
Julia, daughter of Caesar and fourth wife of 
Pompey (2-54 b.c.), 134, 171, 179 
Julia, daughter of Augustus (.2-14 ajj.), 220, 
2:9-232, 235, 257, 259, 262, 263*, 265 
Julia, granddaughter of Augustus (1st cen- 
tury A.D.), 232, 235 

Juha, daughter of Germanicus (ist century) , 

Julian (Flavius Claudius Julianus), called the 
-Apostate, Roman emperor (331-363), 18, 

474, 635 

Julian Aqueduct, 220 

Julian Laws, of Caesar, 171-173; of Augustus, 
223-224, 230, 235, 255, 256, 290 



INDEX 


727 


Julianus, see Didius Julian 
Julianas, Salvius, jurist (fl. 2nd century), 392, 
394, 416 

Julii, Roman clan, 21, 167 
Julio-Claudiaa dynasty, 211-285, 286, 289, 293, 
349 

Jullian, Camille, French historian (1859-1933), 

475 , 

Juno, 61, 67, 81, 82, 83, 349, 358; of Veu, 62 
Juno Moneta, Temple of, 358 
Jupiter (Jove), 61, 63, 67, 81, 82, 83, 93, 100, 
144, 151, 167, 242, 256, 268, 284, 306, 317, 349, 
350- 357-358, 388, 389, 419, 458, 496, 548, 625, 
626, 640; Jupiter Optimus Maximus, 358; 
Jupiter Pluvius, 61; Jupiter Stator, 358; Ju- 
piter Tonans, 61, 357; planet, 309 
Jupiter, Temple of, 92, 341 
Jupiter, Temple of (Pompeii), 459 
Jupiter Heliopolitanus, Temple of, 511 
Jupiter, Juno, and Minerva, Temple of, 81, 
83, 287, 289, 290, 358 
Jupiter Stator, Temple of, 358 
Jupiter Tonans, Temple of, 61, 357 
juries, 114, 116-117, 121, 126, 178, 192, 403 
jurisprudence, see law 
Justice, see Astraea 
Justin, Christian martyr (?-io8), 61 1 
Justin Mart}'r (Jusdnus Flavius), Church 
father in Palestine (ioo?-i66), 592, 61 1 
Justinian I the Great (Flavius Anicius Jus- 
tinianus), Byzantine emperor (483-565), 
392, 393. 394. 399. 40^. 409. 416. 605, 654 
Juvenal (Decimus Junius Juvenalis), satirical 
poet (ca. 6o-ca. 140), 67, 73, 234, 272, 295, 
312. 314, 319, 325, 332, 334, 341, 343, 363, 364, 
365, 366, 367, 369, 370, 371, 372-373. 376, 381, 
387, 388, 389, 402, 433, 436, 437-439. 440. 453. 
466, 546, 612, 671 
Karlsburg, 633 

Keats, John, English poet (1795-1821), 147, 

157 

Kent, 476 

Kerasous, or Cerasus (Kerasun), 320 
Kerch, see Panticapaeum 
Kerch, Strait of, 517 

Kingdom of Heaven, 538, 540-542, 557, 559, 
560, 562, 564-570, 575, 582, 593, 594-595. 59ti. 
597, 602, 603-604, 605, 617 
Klausner, Joseph, Jewish scholar (b. 1874), 

“knucklebones,” 354 
Krishna, 553 
Kuban River, 517 

L 

labarum, 654 

Labeo, Antistius, jurist (?-42 B.c.), 203,39I-392 
Labienius, Quintus, general (?-39 b.c.), 205 
Labienus, Titus, politician and soldier (?-45 
B.C.), 182, 186, 189, 205 


Lactantius Firmianus, Lucius Caelius, father 
of the Latin church, in Africa (260? -325?), 
578,643,651,654,662 
Lady of Elche, The, 469 
Laelius Sapiens, Caius (ca. 186-? B.C.), 96-97, 
loi, 102, 107, 1 14 

Laenas, Caius Popihus, consul and ambassador 
(fl. 172-168 B.C.), 107 

Laems, Praetorian prefect (fl. reign of Corn- 
modus), 448 

Lais (Greek Anthology) , 510 
Lake Garda, see Garda, Lago di 
Lake Regillus, Battle of (496 B.c.), ... 
Lalage, 247 

Lambaesis (Lambese), 466 

Lamia, Lucius Aelius, consul and patron (fl. 

ist century B.c. and ist century a.d.), 233 
Lampridius, Aelius, Latin historian (fl. early 
4th century), 624, 634 

land distribution, in (Greece, 86; in Rome, 47, 
87, 113-117, 119, 120, I2I, 126, 128, 136, 171, 
174. 184, 192-193, 213, 2i8, 287, 319, 336, 407, 
465, 627, 631* 

landownership, 57, 76-77, 90, 111-118, 192, 213, 
219. 319-320. 333. 336. 483. 631. 644. 657 
landscape, see painting 

language, Etruscan, 5, 17; Celtic, 36; Cartha- 
ginian, 41; Latin, 17, 38, 72-73 
Lanuvium (Civita Lavinia), 35, 371, 423 
Lttocoon, 345 

Laodicea (Latakia), 512, 513, 516 
lararium, 343 
Lares, 7, 58, 69, 226 
lares compitales, 81 
Larissa, 186 

Larius, Lacus, see Lake Como 
Lasa (or Mean), Etruscan goddess, 7 
Last Supper, 555 
La Tern iron culture, 471, 472 
Lateran Aluseum, 350 

latifundia, 77, 104, 105, 107, 111-114, 118, 130, 
190.297.319.336411464465473498,631,668 
Latin, 72-74, 97, 98, 101, 102, 103-104, 156, 158- 
162, 164, 166, 167, 177, 233, 258, 259, 295, 304, 
312, 313, 319, 365, 393, 410, 415, 441, 442, 443, 
455. 469. 474. 476. 477. 507. 514. 517. 572. 612, 
619, 630, 661, 671 
Latina, Via, 77 

Latin Language, On the (Varro), 159 
Latin League, 35, 37, 38 
Latins, 5, 11, 21, 35, 36, 39, 241 
Latinus, 240-241 

Latium, 11, 12, 14, 18, 21, 35, 37, 43, 51, 61, 200, 
240-241, 344, 437, 453, 666 
laurel, 83, 191 
Laurentum, 344, 440 

Laureolus, robber, crucified (1st century), 

385, 

Lavinia, 12, 241 
Law, see Torah 

law, under the Republic, 22-33, 57. 67, 70, 71, 
72. 73. 79. 83, 89, 99, 104-105, 113-118, 126, 



INDEX 


728 

law, under the Republic {continued) 

133, 138, 139-140, 144, 171-173, 174, 176, 179, 
182, 189, 191-194, 198; Cicero on, 165-166; 
under the Principate, 213-217, 219, 221-225, 
230-231, 250, 261, 262, 264, 269, 270-271, 293, 
312, 323, 324, 331-332, 335, 338, 340, 341, 364, 
369, 391-406, 416, 418, 420, 424, 427-428, 443, 
448, 465. 473. 474. 477. 481. 488, 5 "o. 619. 646; 
under the monarchy, 633-634, 642-652, 656- 
657, 661; of Rome, 670 

law, practice of, 141, 160, 316, 317, 466, 
(Ovid’s) 254, (Seneca’s) 301, 401-403, (Ju- 
venal’s) 437, (Pliny’s) 439-441, (Apuleius’) 
467-468, (Lucian’s) 495, (TertuUian’s) 612, 
(L. Septimius Severus’) 621 
Law of the Nations, see ius gentium 
Laws (Cicero), see Legibus, De 
lays, 73 

Lebanon (Libanus), 329 
Lebanon {one. Libanus) Mountains, 511 
lectures, 135, 443, 465, 483-485, 488-490, 495, 
505,511,514,521-522,635 
legates, 216 

legend, in Livy, 251, 256, 308 
Legibus, De (Cicero), 141, 163* 

Leicester {one. Ratae Coritanorum), 477 
Leiden (one. Lugdunum Batavorum), 324 
leisure, 235 

Lemures, 59-60; Feast of, 65 

Lentuli, Roman family, 76 

Lentulus, Gnaeus, senator (fl. ist century), 

332 

Lentulus Batiates, trainer of gladiators (fl. ist 
century b.c.), 137 

Lentulus Crus, Lucius Cornelius, consul (?-48 
B.C.), 181, 183, 185 

Lentulus Sura, Publius Cornelius, conspirator 
(7-63 B.C.), 129, 143-144, 202 
Leochares, Athenian sculptor (fl. 4th cenmry 
B.C.), 349 

Leonardo, see Vinci, Leonardo da 
Lepidus, Marcus Aemilius, consul (?-2i6 b.c.), 
382 

Lepidus, Marcus Aemihus, triumvir (’-13 
B.C.), 201, 203, 225 
Leptis Magna (Lebda), 39, 105, 465 
Leptis Minor, 40, 465 
Lesbia, 135, 155-157 
Lesbos, 253 

Lessing, Gotthold Ephraim, German critic 
and dramatist (1729-1781), 100, 553 
letters, Cornelia’s, 113; Cicero’s, 162-163, ^6$, 
195; Marcus AureUus’, 425, 430; Pliny the 
Younger’s, 440-441; Fronto’s, 442 
Leucas {It. Santa Alaura), 139 
Leuce Come, 508 
Leviticus, 539, 567 
lex talionis, 32, 398 
Liber, 62, 65-66 
Libera, 65-66 
Liberalia, 66 
Libra, 298 


libraries, in Carthage, 42; in Athens, 418; un- 
der Rome, 96, 131, 132, 159, 219, 234, 343, 
459, 635, 662 

libraries, public, 159, 193, 219, 234, 257, 291, 
358, 360, 376, 411, 421, 440, 461, 466, 515, 627 
Libya, 43, 46, 48, 413, 500 
Licinian laws, 24, 114 

Licinianus, son of Licinius and nephew of 
Constantine I (7-326), 663-664 
Licinius (Caius Flavius Valerius Licinianus 
Licinius) , Roman emperor (7-325), 653-655, 
656, 659, 663 

Licinius Calvus (Stolo), Caius, tribune and 
consul (fl. 376-361 B.C.), 24 
Liege, 176 

Life of the 'Roman People (Varro), 160 
lighthouses, 325 
Ligurians, 4, 35, 468 
limes, 417, 480, 627 
Limonum (Limoges), 473 
Lindum (Lincoln), 477 
Linus, Bishop of Rome (fl. ist cenmry), 617 
Lisbon, see Cilisipo 
literary criticism, 315, 513, 633, 636 
literamre, Etruscan, 5; Greek, 95-96, 104, 123, 
259. 630; under the early Republic, 5, 73-75, 
97-105, 108, 113, 123; under the Revolution, 
144-146, 174, 178; under the Principate, 215, 
225. 233-258, 259, 263, 287, 291, 293, 295-319, 
367-368, 408, 415, 433-446, 456, 464, 467-468, 
477, 483-486, 490-497, 509-5 >o, 539-542, 555- 
595, 603, 606-616, 618, 620, 621; under the 
monarchy, 621, 625, 629, 635-638, 661, 662- 
663; of Rome, 671 
Litemum (Patria), 92, 347 
Lives of Illustrious Men (Suetonius), 442 
Lives of the Sophists (Philostrams), 635 
Livia, third wife of Augusms (ist century 
B.c. and ist cenmry a.d.), 205, 223, 229-232, 
262, 264, 268, 286, 299, 348, 350, 354 
Livia Orestilla, wife of Caligula (ist cenmry 
AJ).), 266 
Livias, 508 

Livilla, daughter of Antonia and wife of Dru- 
SUS (7-31 A.D.), 264, 268 
Livius Andronicus, earliest Roman poet (fl. 

240 B.C.), 74 

Livy (Tims Livius), historian (59B.C.-A.D. 17), 
23, 14, 15, 21, 36*, 48, 53, 60, 72, 89, 94, 112, 
.225, 233, 250-252, 434, 636, 671 
Lixus, 39 
Locri, 35, 37, 51 
Logia (sayings of Christ), 556 
logic, 164, 425 

Logos, 501-502, 540, 541, 556, 589, 594-595, 604, 
615, 658 

Loire {one. Liger), 470 
Loisy, Alfred Firmin, French Orientalist and 
Biblical scholar (1857-1940), 554 
Lollia Paulina, wife of Caligula (ist cenmry 
A.D.), 266, 273, 373 



IX 

Lollius, governor of Britain (fl. 2nd century), 
476 

Lombards, 431 
Lombardy, 670 

London imc. Londinium), 324, 476, 477, 523- 
5 Z 4 

Longinus, Caius Cassius, jurist (£ 1 . 1st cen- 
tury), 282 

Longinus, Dionysius Cassius, Greek philoso- 
pher and critic (2i3?-272), 630, 636 
Longinus, Lucius Cassius, governor of Syria 

(?-42 B.C.), 531 

Longobardi, see Lombards 
Longus, Greek sophist and novelist (fl. 3rd 
century), 516, 637 
lotteries, 219, 624 

Louis XIV, King of France (11538-1715), 258 

Lourdes, 563 

Louvre, 348* 

love feast, see agape 

Luca (Lucca), 175 

Lucan (Marcus Annaeus Lucanus), poet (39- 
65), 282, 293, 296, 316, 319, 408, 435, 470 
Lucanians, 35, 37, 51, 519 
Lucanus, Publius Terentius, senator (2nd cen- 
tury B.C.), loi 

Lucian, Greek satirical author (120? -200?), 
60, 84, 299, 304, 312, 428, 487, 489, 494-497. 

513. 597. 636 

Lucifer, 241, 289 

Lucilius, Caius, satirisB (180-103 b.c.), 73, 97, 
H 5 . 437 . 509 

Lucilius Junior, governor and Epicurean (fl. 
1st century), 304, 306 

Lucilla, daughter of Marcus Aurelius (2nd 
century), 426 

Lucilla, sister of Marcus Aurelius (2nd cen- 
tury), 447 
Lucina, 60, 236 

Lucius (in Apuleius’ Golden Ass), 467-468 
Lucius Caesar, grandson of Augustus (?-2 

A. D.), 230-231, 473 

Lucretia, wife of Collatinus (6th century 

B. C.), 16, 23 

Lucretia (in Martial), 318 
Lucretius Cams, Titus, poet (99? -55? b.c.), 
* 5 *. 73 . 95. 98. 102, 146-154, 155, 164, 225, 234- 
235. 238, 241, 243, 245, 258, 296, 308, 388, 637, 
667, 671 

Lucrinus, Lacus, 220 

LucuUus, Lucius Licinius, general and patron 
(?-57? B.C.), 129, 130, 132, 138, 139, 140, 171, 

211, 265 272, 322, ^2, 353, 373. 508. 5‘9 
l-ucuilus, Lucius Licinius, proconsul (fl. 2nd 
century b.c.) , 87 

hidi (games), 74, 377-378, 381-387; ludi iu- 
venales, 277; ludi saeculares, 225-226, 248, 
387; ludi scenici, 74, 377-378 
TjUdovisi Battle Sarcophagus, 635 
Ludovisi Juno, 349 

Lugdunum (Lyons), 234, 269, 271, 283, 324, 
332, 470, 473, 474, 504, 611, 649 


lEX 729 

Luke, St., evangelist (fl. ist century), 553, 555- 
574. 575 *. 583. 590 

Luke, The Gospel of St., 555-574, 575*, 583, 
605 

Luna (Luni), 322, 357, 454 
Lupanaria, see prostitution 
Lupercalia, 63, 65, 195-196, 388 
Luperci (Brotherhood of the Wolf), 63, 65, 
388 

Lusitania (Portugal), 87, 277, 311, 322,470, 671 
lustrum, 29, 63 
Lutetia, see Paris 

Luther, Martin, leader of German Reforma- 
tion (1483-1546), 592 

luxury, under the Republic, 54, 70-71, 88-89, 
92,97, 103, 128, 132, 136, 160, 185, 186, 204; 
under the Principate, 211, 213, 219, 223, 224, 
232, 248, 251, 256, 297, 303, 305, 308, 311, 328- 
330. 331. 333 . 337. 342. 364. 373-377. 438. 45 < 5 , 
465, 474, 478, 522, 608, 666, 667 
Lycaonia, 513 
Lyce, 247 

Lyceum, Aristotle’s, 421, 489-490 
Lycia, 203, 218 
Lyciscus, 369 
LycopoUs, 608 

Lycurgus, Spartan lawgiver (9th century 
B,c.), 32, 226 
Lydda, 548 

Lydia, 5, 6t, 9, 125, 513, 514-515, 523 
Lydia (Horace), 247 
Lyons, see Lugdunum 
lyre, 379-381 

lyric poetry, 82, 155-158, 244-250, 252-254, 278, 
3 « 5 - 3 « 8 , 379. 509-510. 637-638 
Lysias, Athenian orator (450.^-380? b.c.), 95 
Lystra, 513, 582, 583 

M 

Ma, 147, 523 

Maccabee, Judas, Jewish patriot (fl. 167 b.c.), 
54 ^ 

Maccabee, Simon, King of Judea (fl. 142 b.c.) , 
530 

Maccabees, see Hasmoneans 
Macedon or Macedonia, 51, 52, 85-87, 88, 90, 
91, 94, 96, 136, 200, 203, 212, 216, 482, 483, 
5>9. 583. 585. 623, 630, 633 
Macedonian Wars, 85-87, 482 
Macellum, 342 
machinery, 323, 356 

Macrina, Caeha, millionaire (2nd century), 

411, 

Macrinus (Marcus Opellius Severus Macri- 
nus) ,Roman emperor (i64?-2i8),529,623-624 
Madaura (Medaura), 466, 467 
Madeira, 40, 308 

Madonna dellit Febbre, La (Our Lady of the 
Fever), 73 

Maeander (Menderez), 514 



730 


INDEX 


Maecenas, Cains Cilnius, statesman and patron 
(?-8 B.C.), 212, 215, 219, 224, 225, 234, 237, 
239, 244, 246, 250, 253, 280, 454 
Maelius, Spurius, politician (?-439 b.c.), 23 
Maesa, Julia, sister of Julia Domna (?-222), 
623-626 

Maggiore, Lago {me. Lacus Verbanus) , 4, 454 
Magi, 525, 526, 529, 559, 606, 608 
magic, 60, 64, 75, 94, 308, 311-312, 388, 415, 419, 
^6-467485,507,512,525-526,537-538,559,656 
Magna Mater (Great Mother), 94, 147, 381, 
390, 523, 595, 672; see also Cybele 
Magnesia (Manissa), battle in 190 b.c., 55, 86, 
208, 514 

Magnificat, 558 

Mago, Carthaginian general, brother of Han- 
nibal (fl. end of 3rd century B.a), 47 
Mago, Carthaginian writer in agriculture, 40, 
42, 464 
Maia, 60, 67 

meuestate, lex lulia de, 262, 264, 269, 279,416,591 
Maimonides, Spanish Jewish rabbi and phi- 
losopher (1135-1204), 548 
Mainz {me. Magontiacum), 291, 324, 627, 633 
Maison Carree, 357, 473 
Malaga (anc. Malaca), 469, 470 
malaria, 193, 311, 312, 326!, 631, 666 
Malchus, Tyrian dyeing firm, 331 
Mallonia, critic of Tiberius, and suicide (ist 
century), 371 
Mallus, 95 
Malta, 40, 587 

Mamaea, Julia, daughter of Julia Maesa and 
mother of Alexander Severus (?-235), 623- 
627 

Mamertines, 43-44 
Mammon, 340, 597 
Manes, 59 

Man, Isle of (me. Monapia or Monarina), 476, 
477 

Manchester {me. Mancumium), 477 
Mani of Ctesiphon, Persian mystic (215-273), 
605-606 
Mania, 7 
Manicheism, 606 
manifest destiny, 43 
Mandian Law, 140 

ManUius, senator (fl. 2nd century b.c.), 103 
Manilius, Caius, Roman tribune (fl. 66 b.c.), 
140 

Manlii, Roman clan, 21 

Manlius, Lucius, conspirator (fl. ist century 
B.C.), 144, 157 

Manlius, Marcus, general (’-384 b.c.), 23 
manners, 70-72, 90, loi, 102, 108, 134-135, 234- 
235. 286, 310, 316, 335 
mmsio, 324 

mansions, 88, 92, 132, 133, 160, 162, 190, 195, 
202, 213, 223, 245*, 290, 297, 326, 327, 328, 
339. 340. 343-345. 351. 355. 362, 373-374. 4^*. 
453. 456. 508, 635 
Mantua, 3, 8, ii, 235, 454 


Mantus, 7 

manumission, see emancipation 
manuscripts, 280, 662 
maps, 220, 308 

Marathon, battle in 490 B.c., 208, 442, 641 
Marcellinus, Roman Pope (reigned 296-304), 
652 

Marcellus, Marcus Claudius, consul and con- 
queror of Syracuse (268? -208 b.c.), 50, 52, 
82, 92 

Marcellus, Alarcus Claudius, son-in-law of 
Augustus (43-23 B.C.), 219, 230, 239, 357 
Marcellus, Marcus Claudius, consul (?-46 
b.c.), 181, 195 

Marcellus, Varius, father of Elagabalus (fl. 

2nd century), 623 
Marcellus, For (Cicero), 195 
Marceotis, Lake, 525 

Marcia, wife of Cato, the Younger and Hor- 
tensius (fl. ist century b.c.), 136 
Marcia, daughter of Cremurius Cordus (ist 
century), 301 

Marcia, Christian mistress of Commodus (2nd 
century), 447-448 
Marcian Aqueduct, 220, 340 
Marcion, Gnostic of Sinope (fl. 2nd century), 
604-605, 616 

Marcomanni, 346, 429, 431, 432, 606, 627, 629 
Marcomannic Wars, 428-432, 443, 505 
Marcus, Gallic Gnostic (fl. and century), 604 
Mariaba, 508 

Mariamne, wife of Herod the Great (fl. end 
of ist century b.c.), 534 
Marinus of Alexandria, famous surgeon (fl. 

ist and 2nd centuries), 505 
Maritime Alps, 474 

Marius, Caius, general and consul (157-86 
B.C.). 3, 26, 27, 116, 118-120, 122-126, 128, 
144, 146, 160, 167, 169, 391, 453 
Alarius, Caius, consul, son of preceding (109?- 
82 B.a), 125 

Mark, St., evangelist (fl. 1st century), 553, 
555-574. 576 

Mark, The Gospel of St., 555-574, 576 
markets, 78, 342 

Alarquardt, Joachim, German antiquarian 
(1812-1882), 364 

marriage, in Etruria, 7; under the Republic, 
57, 67, 68-69, 132. 134. 204; under the Princi- 
pate, 222-224, t6z, 266, 301, 363-364, 369-371, 
396. 397, 438, 441, 443, 599, 605; under the 
monarchy, 656, 666; ancient concept of, 
240. 369-370; St. Paul and the Church on, 
590, 598, 600, 647 

Alars, 12, 59, 61, 63, 65, 66-67, 82, 193, 211, 346, 
353. 388, 479; Ultor (the Avenger), 358 
Mars (planet), 309 
Alars Ultor, Temple of, 358, 383 
Marseilles {me. Massalia), 43, 49, 119, 180, 
184, 231, 313, 326, 470, 474, 504, 654 
iVlarsians, 270 
Alarsyas, 298 



INDEX 


731 


Martial (Marcus Valerius Martialis), Latin 
epigrammatist (40?-i02?), 158, 234, 289, 290, 
291, 295, 296, 312, 315-318, 319. 3+>> 34^. 355, 
369,370,371,380,385,389,398,403,408,437,441 
Mary, mother of Christ, 527, 558-559, 500, 572 
Mary, aunt of Christ, 572-573 
Mary Magdalene, cured by Christ (ist cen- 
tury), 563, 572-573. 577 
Masada, 544 

Masinissa, King of Numidia (238-148 b.c.), 
53, 105-106, 107, 1 18, 166, 464 
Mass, Catholic, 578-579, 595, 599, 602, 603 
MassaUa, see Marseilles 
Materia Medica (Dioscorides), 505 
Mater Matuta, Temple of 
materiahsm, in Lucretius, 146-154; in Seneca, 
304 

mathematics, 414, 488, 503-504, 507 
Matheinatike Syntaxis (Ptolemy), 502-505 
Matho, Libyan rebel leader (fl. 241-237 b.c.), 

46 

Matius, citizen and friend of Caesar (n. rst 
century B.C.), 191, 195 
Matthas, Dutch biblical scholar, 5.-4 
Matthew, St., evangelist and apostie, 553, 555- 
574 

Matthew, The Gospel of St., 555-574. ^’3 
Mauretania (Morocco), 268, 413, 417, 466 
Mauretania Caesariensis, 466 
Mauretania Tingitana, 466 
Mauri, see Moors 

Mausoleum of Hadrian (Castel Sant’ An- 
gelo), 4, 422 

Maxentius (.Marcus Aurelius Valerius Maxen- 
tius), Roman emperor (reigned 306-312), 
653-654, 656, 661 

Maximian (Alarcus Aurelius Valerius Maxi- 
mianus Herculius), Roman emperor (240?- 
310), 635, 640, 644, 651, 653-654, 663 
Maximilla, Montanist heretic (2nd century), 
605 

Maximinus (Caius Julius Verus Maximinus 
“Thrax”), Roman emperor (1727-238), 627- 
628 

Maximinus Daza, Roman emperor (reigned 
308-314), 653-654 

Maximus Tyrius, Greek philosopher (fl. 2nd 
century), 426 

Alaximus and Vibo, banking firm, 332 

measures, 78 

Mechanica (Hero), 504 

Aledea, 256, 353, 385 

Medea (painting), 354 

Aledea (Ovid), 255 

Medea (Seneca), 307 

Aledia, 413 

Medicamina Faciei Feminineae, De (Ovid), 

255 

Medici, Lorenzo de’, Florentine poet, patron, 
and scholar (1448-1492), 131 
Medicina, De (Celsus), 313 


medicine, in Etruria, 6; under Rome, 75-76, 
104, 135, 227, 308, 310, 311-313, 324, 368, 414, 
465, 467, 488, 504-507, 510, 512, 514, 515, 516, 
517, 661, 671 
Adediolanum, see Milan 

Meditations (Alarcus Aurelius), 425-426, 430, 
431. 442, 443-446, 449 

Mediterranean, 3, 6, 18, 25, 29, 34, 38, 39, 40, 
43. 54. 76, 78, 80, 81, 85, 105, 107, 111, 139, 
169, 170, 177, 187, 188, 212, 218, 221, 241, 251, 
266, 310, 320, 324, 325, 328, 337, 339, 355, 367, 
419, 453, 462, 464, 465, 466, 468, 469, 470, 474, 
484, 498, 499, 500, 508, 512, 513, 518, 523-524, 
5^7. 535-536, 545, 547, 596, 602, 670 
mediums of exchange; in Etruria, 6, 17; in 
Carthage, 40, 46; under Rome, 17, 78-79, 184, 
192, 205, 218, 287*, 330-332, 336, 448, 632, 641, 
643, 668 

Megalesia (Feast of the Great Goddess), 94 
Megara, 239, 300, 487 
Meir, Jewish rabbi (fl. 2nd century), 547 
Alela, Lucius Annaeus, father of Lucan and 
brother of Seneca (3-65), 282 
Alela, Pomponius, geographer (fl. ist cen- 
tury), 308 

Aleleager, Greek epigrammatist (fl. ist cen- 
tury B.C.), 509-510 
Melkart, 42, 45, 465 

Memmius, Caius, statesman (?-ioo b.c.), izo 
Memmius, Caius Gemellus, politician and man 
of letters ( fl. first century b.c. ) , 1 48, 1 5 5, 1 5 7 
memoirs, 123, 159, 275 
Memoirs (Agrippina the Younger), 275 
Memoirs (Sulla), 123 
Alemphis, 498 
Menaechmi (Plautus), 100 
Menander, Greek comic dramatist (342-291 
B.C.), 99, loo, 102, 513 

Menippus, Syrian Cynic philosopher (fl. 60 
B.C.), 297, 509 

Menippus (in Lucian), 495, 497 
Alephitis, 75 

mercenaries, 43, 46, 48, 53, 106, 207, 429, 517, 
624, 669, 670 

Alercury, 62, 63, 93, 342, 387, 473, 479. 601 
Alesopotamia, 342, 349, 413, 414, 428, 528, 530, 
548, 608, 622, 627, 629, 630, 641 
Messala, Marcus Valerius, consul (fl. ist cen- 
tury B.C.), 129 

Messala, Marcus Valerius Cort-inus, genera! 
and patron (fl. ist century b.c.), 221, 233- 

234. 252-253 

Messalina, Valeria, wife of Claudius (.^-48), 

272-273. 302 

Alessana (Alessina), 44, 464 
Messene, 329, 413 

Messiah, 226, 243, 538, 540-542, 548, 554, 558*, 
559, 560, 564-570, 577, 581, 582, 585, 588-589, 
59«. 593. 595. 603, 604, 605 
metallurgy, 77, 322-323, 328, 469, 479 
Metamorphoseon Libri XI (Apuleius), see 
Golden Ass 



INDEX 


732 

Metamorphoses (Ovid),' 256, 257, 258 
metaphysics, 95, 147, 154, 164, 196, 300, 304, 
591,613 

Metapontum, 35, 51 

Metaurus (Metauro) River (battle of, 207 

B.c.),53 

Metellus, Lucius Caecilius, politician (fl. ist 
century b.c.), 183 

Metellus Celer, Caius Caecilius, husband of 
Clodia (fl. ist century b.c.), 135 
Metellus Macedonicus, Quintus Caecilius, 
general (fl. ist century b.c.), 134 
Metellus Numidicus, Quintus Caecilius (fl. 
109-99 B.C.), 1 19 

Metellus Pius, Caecilius (.^-63 b.c.), general, 

137 

Metellus Pius Scipio, Quintus Caecilius, gen- 
eral (?-46b.c.), 186, 189, 194 
meteorology, 308 

Metrodora, Alexandrian woman physician (fl. 
ist century), 505 

Metrodorus, Greek Epicurean philosopher 
(P-277 B-C-), 133 

Metronax, philosopher (fl. ist century), 303 
Metropohtan Museum of Art, 347, 351 
Mexico, 469, 600* 

Michael, Archangel, 593 
Michelangelo (Buonarroti), Italian artist 
(1475-1564), 4, 356, 443, 635 
Middle Ages, 178, 243, 249*, 258, 307, 308, 310, 
311, 312, 313, 503,507, 592, 633,644,661,672 
midwives, 312 

migrations, Celtic, ii8; into towns, 190 
Muan (me. Mediolanum), 236, 454, 629, 635, 
640, 644, 653, 654 
Milan, Edict of, 654, 657, 658 
Miles Gloriosus (Plautus), 100 
Milesian Tales, 297, 514, 636 
Miletus, 168, 312, 329, 513-514, 546 
militar y science, 327-328 
milleiiori, 347 

Mill, John Smart, English philosopher (1806- 
1873), 609 

Millenarium Aureum, 340-341 
milleimium, see Kingdom of Heaven 
Milo, Pyrrhus’ general, 38 
Milo Papinianus, Tims Annius, politician 
(P-48 b.c.), 169, 173, 180, 184, 188, 189 
Milton, John, Enghsh poet (1608-1674), 243, 
671 

mimes, 378, 389, 430 
Alinas de Rio Tinto, 469 
Mincio (one. Mincius), 235 
Minerva, 6i, 81, 83, 31 1, 358; Pallas Minerva, 
61; ree also Pallas Athene 
Alinerva, Temple of, 74 
Minervina, first wife of Constantine I (fl. 4th 
cenmry), 663 

mining, Etruscan, 6; Carthaginian (in Spain), 
40, 47, 469; Roman (in Spain), 54, 346, 469; 
Roman, 77, 80, 131, 218, 310, 320, 322, 330, 
336, 448, 455, 477, 483, 513, 632, 665 


Minos, 284 
Minotaur, 354 
Mintumae, 113, 322 

Minucius, Quinms, proconsul (fl. 2nd century 
B.C.), 87 

Minucius Fehx, Latin Christian writer (fl. 2nd 
century), 611,612 

Minucius Rufus, Marcus, dictator (fl. 216 
B.C.), 50 

miracles, 60, 75, 93, 435, 442, 466, 512, 525-526, 
553. 556, 557. 559. 562-563, 576, 580, 585, 607 
Miranda (me. Continum Lusitanorum), 427* 
Misenum (Aliseno), 132, 265, 325, 326, 457 
Mithraism, see Zoroastrianism 
Mithras, 280, 390, 524, 529, 540, 553, 598, 600*, 
606, 639, 654; see also Zoroastrianism 
Alithridates I, King of Ponms (fl. ca. 302, 
B.C.), 517 

Alithridates VI the Great, King of Ponms 
(1327-63 B.C.), 122-125, 132, 140, 188, 347, 
482, 507,517-519, 528 

Mithridatic 'Wars, 1 22- 1 25, 1 3 2, 1 40, 1 88,5 1 6-5 1 9 
Alnester, dancer (fl. ist century), 272 
Moab, 530 
Modalists, 605 
Alodena, see Mutina 
Modernism, 554 
^oesia, 218, 291, 480, 653, 670 
Aloguntiacum (Mayence), 480 
Mofiere (Jean Baptiste Poquelin), French 
dramatist (1622-1673), 100 
Mommsen, (Christian Matthias) Theodor, 
German historian (1817-1903), 48, 88, 175, 
178, 265, 432, 475 
Monarchians, 605 

monarchy, in Etruria, 6; in Rome, 13-16, 34, 
139, 190, 193-197, 198, 208, 670; Cicero on, 
165; the Principate, 209-549; the later mon- 
archy, 621-670 
monasticism, 595, 657, 668 
Mondragone, Villa, 454* 
money-changers, 533, 570 
moneylending, 79, 88, 103, 129-130, 131, 140, 
169-170, 192, 196, 219, 246, 302, 303, 331- 
332. 336, 482, 500, 539, 627, 657 
Alonophysites, fe5 
monopolies, 80, 642 

monotheism, 365-366, 390, 502, 507, 578, 582, 
612, 639, 656 
Alonothehtes, 605 

Alontaigne, Michel Eyquem de, French phi- 
losopher and essayist (1533-1592), 304, 307, 
440, 466, 484 
Alontanism, 613 

Alontanus, Phrygian heretic (fl. ca. 156), 605 
months of the Roman year, 66-67; Quinctilis 
renamed Julius, 193 
Alontignac, 470-471 
Moors, (one. Mauri), 387, 417, 431 
Moralia (Plutarch), 483, 485-486 
morals, in Etruria, 7; in Carthage, 41; in 
Capua, 52; in Germany, 479; in Corinth, 



INDEX 


733 


morals {continued') 

487; under the Republic, 54, 57, 58, 67-69, 
71, 72, 84, 89, 90, 92, 95, 97, 102, 104, 108, 
1 12, 132-133, 134, 146, 155, 159, 160, 164, 205, 
21 1; under the Principate and monarchy, 
221-225, 232, 235, 239, 247-248, 251, 253-257, 
260, 274, 276, 286, 293, 296-299, 300-301, 305, 
307, 308, 315, 316, 363-366, 368, 369-371, 373, 
443, 456, 500, 522, 593, 598-599, 602, 626-627, 
628, 646, 656, 665-667; Caesar’s, 167-169; 
Clodius’, 172-173; Antony’s, 199-200, 204- 
206; Juba’s, 230-232; Horace on, 247-250; 
Livy on, 251; Tiberius’, 263; Caligula’s, 266- 
267; Claudius’, Messalina’s, and Agrippina’s, 
272-273; Nero’s, 276-277, 279; Galba’s, 284; 
Vespasian’s, 288; Tims’, 288, 289; Domi- 
tian’s, 290; Juvenal on, 438-439; Marcus Au- 
rebus’, 444-446; Commodus’, 446; Herod’s, 
532; Christ’s moral ideas, 566-567; Elaga- 
balus’, 624-625; Alexander Severus’, 625-627 
Morgantia, 121 

Mortibus Fersecutontm, De (Lactanrius), 662 
mosaic, 343, 345, 442, 459, 477, 601, 635 
Mosaic Code, 537, 538, 542, 567, 585 
Moses, 536, 567, 574, 576, 582, 586 
Moslems, 507 
Mosul, 529 

mother, the, in the Republic, 58, 59 
Mt. Alban, ii 
•Mt. Moriah, 533 
Mount of Olives, 570 

iMucianus, Licinius, general and historian (fl. 

ist century), 310 
Mulvian Bridge, 654, 662 
Mummius Achaicus, Lucius, general (fl. 2nd 
cenmry B.C.), 87, 297 
Munda, battle in 45 b.c., 190, 470 
murals, see painting 

Muratori, Ludovico Antonio, Italian archae- 
ologist (1672-1750), 616 
•Murena, Lucius Licinius, propraetor in Asia 
(fl. 83-81 B.c.), 519 
murrhine glass, 347, 374 
•Musa, Antonius, physician (fl. end of ist cen- 
mry B.C.), 227, 313 

Alusa Paidike (Strabo of Sardis), 509* 

Muses, 150, 247, 510, 609 
Museum (Alexandria), 500 
music, in Etruria, 7, ii, 18; under Rome, 18, 
69, 74, 82, 83, 90, 99, 133, 135, 159, 204, 226, 
277-279. 282-283, 291, 302, 314, 335, 354-355, 
367, 376, 377. 379-381. 384, 414, 421, 430, 440, 
456, 487, 500, 51 1, 512, 523, 532, 599, 624, 625, 
635; Christian, 601-602 
Alusica, De (Varro), 379 
Mutina, (.Modena, q.v.), 11,78, 87, 201, 322, 455 
•Mycale, 514 
■Myos Hormos, 499 
.Myrlea, 520 

■Myron, Greek sculptor (fl. ca. 450 B.c.), 338, 
358 

Myrtale, 247 


Mysia, 513, 605 

mysteries, see Eleusinian mysteries, Orphic 
doctrine, Pythagoreanism 
Mysteries, Temple of the, 43 1 
mysticism, 468, 501-502, 514, 522, 524-525, 537, 
547. 549. 553. 582. 589. 594-595. 604-611, 614- 
615, 633, 667; see also pantheism 
mjTrhology, 75, 84, 94, 165, 241, 248, 251, 256, 
3J<i, 317, 353 . 367. 522-525. 604 
Mytilene, 186, 516 

N 

Naber, Dutch biblical scholar, 554 
Kaevius, Cnaeus, dramatist and poet (?-ca. 

202 B.C.), 74-75, 98, 155, 241 
Naissus (Nish), 630, 653 
names, 56-57, 76 

Naples (one. Neapolis), 4, 35, 37, 52, 141, 236, 
237, 278, 316, 356, 455, 456, 457, 461; Bay of, 

II. 133. 325 

Naples Museum, 349, 350, 351, 352, 354, 459- 
460, 634 

Napoleon I (Bonaparte), Emperor of the 
French(i769-i82i),4i2,4i6,484,553, 670 
Narbo (Narbonne), 1 16, 473 
Narcissus, secretary of Claudius (?-54 ajj.), 
270-273 

Narcissus (or Dionysus), 459 
Nativity, 558-559 

Natura Deoruvi, De (Cicero), 163* 

Natural History (Pbny the Elder), see His- 
toria Naturalis 

nature, love of, in Lucretius, 147; in Virgil, 
238; in Horace, 246; in Rome, 343; in Pbny 
the Younger, 440; Christ’s, 559 
Nature of Things, On the (Lucretius), see 
Renmt Natura, De 
Naucratis, 498, 499 
naumachia, 270, 377, 383, 470 
naval battles, sham, see naumachia 
navigation, 308, 324-326 

navy, Carthaginian, 43, 44, 45, 54, 106, 107; 
under the Republic, 44-45, 80, 106, 107, 13^ 
140, 183-185, 206-207, 518; under the Princi- 
pate, 217, 219, 220, 308, 325, 337, 413, 455 
Nazarenes, 559-560, 576 
Nazareth, 535, 554, 558, 560, 562, 563 
Neaera, 247 
Neapolis, see Naples 
Near East, 5, 21 1, 254, 559, 615 
Nebuchadrezzar II, King of Babylon (reigned 
605-562 B.C.), 39 
Nemean games, 283, 486-487 
Nemi (Aricia), 61, 351 
Neoplatonism, 502, 514, 595, 604, 607 
Neo-Pythagoreans, 497, 594, 604, 607, 614 
Nepos, Cornelius, historian and biographer 
(100-29 B.C.), 146, 160, 162 
Neptune, 60, 63 

Nero (Nero Claudius Caesar Drusus Ger- 
manicus. Originally Lucius Domitius 
Ahenobarbus), Roman emperor (37-68), 



734 


INDEX 


Nero (continued) 

56, 68, 81, 92, 159, 263*, 273, 274-285, 286, 
289, 293, 295-296, 298, 299, 300, 301, 302, 
303, 304, 306, 307, 323, 324, 326t, 330, 334, 
336. 339. 344-345. 347. 35o-35i. 35^. 358. 359, 
361, 363, 366, 371, 372, 374, 375, 379, 380, 384, 
388, 397. 418, 434. 443. 45<5. 479. 482. 483. 485. 
490, 491, 525, 528, 554, 575, 578, 587, 591, 
593. 594. 603, 632, 633, 646, 647, 667 
Nero, Baths of, 359, 375 
Nero, Circus of, 578 

Nero, son of Agrippina the Elder (fl. ist cen- 
tury A.D.), 262, 263*, 264 
Nero, Tiberius Claudius, noble, father of Ti- 
berius (fl. ist century B.C.), 205 
Neronia, 277, 296, 381 

Nerva (Marcus Cocceius Nerva), Roman em- 
peror (32-98), 307, 365*, 371, 407-408, 425, 

433.434. 521. 633 

Nerva, 407, 442, 547 
Nervii, 175 
Nestus, 630 
Neumagen, 474 
New Academy, 164, 308 
New Babylon, 260 
New Carthage, see Nova Carthago 
New Comedy (in Athens), 99 
New Jerusalem, 594, 605 
Newman, John Henry, Cardinal, English 
writer (1801-1890), 493 
newspapers, Caesar’s, 172 
NewTestament,553-595,*6oi, 603,605,615, 616 
New Year, 65, 221 

New York, 81, 100, 325, 337, 340, 360* 

Nicaea (Is-nik), 418, 516, 520, 629, 636, 659 
Nicaea, Council of, 659-661, 662, 663 
Nice (one. Nicaea), 474 
Nicene Creed, 660* 

Nicias, (Greek Anthology), ^10 
Nicodemus, Jewish Pharisee ( ist century), 
569 

Nicolaus of Damascus, Greek historian (fl. 

ist century b'.c.), 512-513, 532, 534 
Nicomedes 11 Epiphanes, King of Bithynia 
(reigned 142-91 b.c.), 120, 518 
Nicomedes III Plulopator, King of Bithynia 
(reigned 91-74 B.c.), 167, 518-519 
Nicomedia (Is-nikmid), 418, 490, 516, 520, 
629, 635, 640, 644, 651, 655, 659, 661 
Nicopolis, 482, 490 

Niebuhr, Barthold Georg, German historian 
and philologist (1776-1831), 16*, 392 
Nietzsche, Friedrich Wilhelm, German phi- 
losopher (1844-1900), 104 
Nierinus, general of Trajan (?-ii8), 414 
Nike, 461 

Nile, 188, 419, 498, 499, 502, 636 

Nile, Battle of the, 188 

Nimes (me. Nemausus), 357, 417, 422, 473 

Nineveh, 9* 

Nisibis (Nisibin), 530 
Nisida (me. Nesis), 132 


Noah, 528 

Nola (Nola), 37, 122, 232 
Nomentum, 316 

Norba Caesarina (Alcantara), 470 
Noreia (Neumarkt), 118 
Noricum, 218, 429, 480 
North, the, 481 
North Sea, 470, 478 

Nova Carthago, or New Carthage (Carta- 
gena), 47, 49, 53, 112,470 
Novatian, Christian schismatic (fl. 3rd cen- 
tury), 618 

Novatus, Christian schismatic (fl. 3rd cen- 
tury), 618 

Novatus, Marcus Annaeus (Gallic), governor 
(?-65), 282, 470, 584 
Nova Via, 340, 341 

novel, the, 295, 296-299, 514, 633, 636-637 
Nubians, 366, 500 

Numa Pompilius, second King of Rome (fl. 

8th and 7th centuries B.c.), 13, 66, 80, 167* 
Numantia, 87, 115, 118 
Numbers, 536 

Numidia, 49, 53, 105-106, 118, 160, 168, 190, 
357, 366, 462, 466 
mimina, 59-60 

Numitor, legendary King of Ladum (8th 
century b.c.), 12 

nursing of children, in the Republic, 58; under 
the Principate, 367 
Ny Carlsberg Glyptotek, 350 
nymphaea, see fountains 
NjTuphs, 238-239 

O 

obelisk, 308 

obscenity, in Catullus, 158; in Horace, 246; 
Caligula’s, 268; in Petronius, 299; in Martial, 
316-318; in mimes, 378; in Hadrian, 415; in 
Pliny the Younger, 440; in graffiti, 458; in 
Roman theater, 612, 647 
obstetrics, 313, 505 
Ocean, On the (Poseidonius), 514 
Octavia, sister of Augustus (?-ii b.c.), 179, 
205-206, 208, 230, 239, 268, 269, 274, 371 
Octavia, wife of Nero (40-62), 273, 277, 279- 
280 

Octavian, see Augustus 
Octofuius (Minucius Felix), 61 1 
Octavius, Caius, see Augustus 
Octavius, Cnaeus, consul (?-87 b.c.), 123-124 
Octavius, Marcus, tribune (fl. 2nd century 
B.c.), 1 14 

Odenathus, ruler of Palmyra (.’-266), 630 
Odes (Horace), 215, 246-250, 252 
Odessus (Varna), 480 

Odoacer, first barbarian ruler of Italy (434?- 
493). 670 

Odysseus, 240, 353 
Odyssey, 74, 240 
Oea (Tripoli), 465, 466 
oeciis, 343 



INDEX 


735 


Oedipus, 278, 623 
Oenotria, 4 

Cfficiis, Ds (Cicero), 163*', 165 
old age, 83; Cicero on, i65-i6<S; Seneca on, 
304, 306 

Old Comedy (in Athens), 99 
Old Testament, 501-502, 540, 541* 555, 556, 
557> 559. 578, doi, 604-605, 614 
oligarchy, in Etruria, 6; in Carthage, 54; in 
Rome, 91, 119, 139-140, 190, 208, 212, 214, 
460, 670; Cicero on, 165 
Olisipo (Lisbon), 47a 
Olympia, 124, 277, 486, 489, 521-522 
Olympic games, 277, 282-283, 4®*^ 
Olympieum, 418, 487 
Olympus, 35, 60, 92, 242, 275, 357, 495-496 
omens, 60, 73, 93, 147, 171-172, 197, 228, 251, 
311,388,435,442,525, 621 
ophthalmology, 313, 505 
Oppian Law, 89 

Oppius, Caius, tribune (fl. end of 3rd cen- 
tury B.C.), 89 

Oppius, Caius, citizen and friend of Caesar 
(fl. 1st century B.c.), 191 
Ops, 62; Temple of, 200 
Optica (Ptolemy), 503 
oracles, 64, 164, 197, 243, 251, 415, 429, 454, 
459.485. 50. 525-5^6, 540 
Orator, 9, 10 

oratory, 73, 95, 103-104, 108, 115, 132, 141, 
(Cicero’s) 160-162, 163*, 167, (Caesar’s) 
169, 250, (Livy’s) 251-252, 265, 277, 295, 
302. 304, 308, 314-315, 317, 356, 362, 367-368, 
4^5. 433. 487, 488, (Dion Chrysostomus’) 
521-522. 671 
Orchomenus, 124 
Orcus, 84, 147 
Orestes, 278 

Orestes, Pannonian general (7-476), 670 
prgan, 380-381 
Oriental civilization, 366 
Orientals, 78, 364, 366, 438 
Origen (Origines Adamantius), Christian 
Alexandrian teacher (1857-254?), 578, 591, 
606-607, *5 o 8, 610, 613-615, 616, 618, 626, 647, 
658, 662 

Origines (Cato the Elder), 104, 160 
Ornate (Third) Style (painting), 353 
Orontes, 366, 512 
Orpheus, 94, 256, 385, 525, 626 
Orphic doctrine, 241, 242, 525, 604 
Oscans, 457 

Osiris, 468, 523, 553, 588 
Osrhoene (Diar Modhar), 413, 513 
Osroes, King of Parthia (fl. 2nd century), 413 
Ostheim, 175 

Ostia, 78, 94, 193, 257, 270, 272, 283, 325, 326, 
339. 389. 410. 4”. 453. 45<5. 4<5i 
Ostia, Via, 591 

Otho (.Marcus Salvius Otho), Roman em- 
peror (32-69), 277, 284 285, 390 
Otricoli (anc. Oriculum), 461 


outlines, 159, 305 

Ovid (Publius Ovidius Naso), poet (43 B.c.- 

A. D. 17), 61, 68, 154, 155, 224, 225, 229, 232, 
234. 235. 245. 252. 253-258, 301, 332, 334, 369, 
370. 373. 388-389. 404. 455 

O.xus (Amu Darya), 669 
Oxyrhynchus (Behnesa), 498 

P 

Pachomius, St., Egyptian founder of first 
monastery (2927-346?), 657 
pacifism, 538 

Pacuvius, Marcus, tragic dramatist (220-130 

B. C.), 98 

Padua {one. Patavium), ii, 78, 250, 455 
Padus, see Po 

Paestum (Pesto), 3, 35, 455 
Paeta, Arria, wife of Caecina Paems ( ist cen- 
tur>'). 371 

Paetus, Caecina, aristocrat (?-42), 371 
Pahlavi, 529 

painting, Etruscan, 6, lo-ii; under Rome, 82, 
92, 233, 278, 310, 338, 339, 345, 349, 351-355, 
358, 359. 374. 376. 386, 414, 418, 442, (Pom- 
peian), 459, 477, 511-512, 625, 634, 662; 
Christian, 6ot 

Pais, Ettore, Italian historian (b. 1856), i5t 
palaces, see mansions 

Palatine, 12, 13, 65, 162, 173, 263, 280, 340, 341, 
344. 358,359. 360. 361,635 
Pales, 59 

Palestine, 170, 505, 508-509, 510, 522, 530, 532, 

533, 535. 537. 543, 544, 546, 547-549, 559, 587. 
615, 617, 632, 644 

Palladio, Andrea, Italian architect (1518- 
1580), 356 

Palladium, 61, 240, 663 

Pallas, treasurer of Claudius (fl. ist century), 
270-273, 543 
Pallas Athene, 240, 663 

Palma, Aulus Comehus, general of Trajan 
(?-ti8), 414 
Palma, 470 

Palmyra (Bib. Tadmor), 329, 419, 454, 508, 
511-512, 529, 636, 638, 669 
Pamphilus, Bishop of Caesarea (? -3 10), 662 
pamphlets, 159 
Pamphylia, 218, 582 
Pan, 238-239, 353 

Panaetius of Rhodes, Stoic philosopher (ca. 

i8o-ca. 110 B.C.), 97, 164, 490, 514 
Pandateria (Vandotena), 231, 264, 279 
Panathenaic games, 487 
Panegyric (Pliny the Younger), 433 
Panhellenia, 487 

Pannonia, 217, 218, 231, 429, 480, 620, 627, 629, 
655, 670 

Panormus (Palermo), 45, 464 

Pansa, Caius Vibius, consul (?-43 b.c.), 201 

Pantagruel, 299 

Panthea, beauty of Antioch (2nd centurvO, 
428 



INDEX 


736 


pantheism, Marcus Aurelius’, 444; in Stoicism, 
490. 497 

Pantheon, 220, 290, 356, 359, 361, 420-421, 661 
Panticapaeum (Kerch), 518 
pantomime,74,99,29o,378-379,38o,38i,437489 
paper, 159, 498, 499 

paper currency, equivalent of in Carthage, 40 
Paphlagonia, 418, 519 

Paphnutius, Egyptian Bishop of Upper 
Thebes (fl. 4th century), bfiof 
Paphos, 582 

Papia Poppaea, lex, 224 

Papias, Bishop of Hierapolis and writer (fl. 

2nd century), 555-556, 592 
Papinian (Aemihus Papinianus), jurist (?- 
212), 392, 510. <521, 634, 635 
papyrus, 159, 498 
Paraclete, see Holy Spirit 
paradise, see heaven 
Paradise Lost (Milton), 244 
Parallel Lives (Plutarch), 483-484 
parchment, 159, 529 

Pare, Ambroise, father op French surgery 
(1517-1590), 505 
Parentalia, 65 
Paris, 278, 487, 516 

Paris, famous pantomime actor (fl. ist cen- 
tury)> 437 

Paris lane. Lutetia), 100, 324, 412, 471*, 474 
Parisii, 471*, 474 
Parliament, Houses of, 635 
Parma, n, 455 

Parmenides of Elea, Greek philosopher (fl. 

6th century B.c.), 455 
Paros, 322, 41 1 

Parousia (Second Appearance), 591, 603-604 
Parseeism, see Zoroastrianism 
Parthenius, Roman freedman (fl. ist cen- 
tury), 316 

Parthenon, 328, 348, 359 

Parthia, 131, 178-179, 181, 194, 197, 205-206, 
217, 253, 275, 322, 329, 337, 350*, 366, 390, 
412-413, 414, 428, 448, 508, 512, 513, 528-530, 
531,546,622,623,641 
Pasiphae, 284, 352, 385 

Pasiteles, Greek artist in Rome (fl. 60-30 
B.C.), 349 

Passover, Feast of the, 542, 559, 570-571, 579, 
588* 

pastoral poetry, 235, 236 
Patavium, see Padua 
paterfamilias, see father 
pater patriae, 221 
Patmos, 592 

Patrae (Patras), 125, 325, 486, 546 
patricians, see aristocracy 
patriotism, 67, 72, 74, 85, 242, 251-252, 300, 
650, 668 
Patroclus, 381 

patronage, 233-234, 316-317, 333, 335, 339, 374, 
415, 423, 621, 661 
patronus, 22 


Paul, St. (Saul), apostle to the Gentiles (10?- 
64?). 271. 282, 325, 404, 470, 492, 513, 515, 
554-556. 559. 568t. 570*. 571. 573. 575. 57^, 
578. 579-592, 604, 605, 646 
Paul, Epistles of St., 553, 555, 579, 585, 587-591, 
592, 605 

Paul of Samosata, Syrian heretic (fl. 2nd cen- 
tury), 605 

Paul the Hermit, Egyptian Christian monk 
(fl. 3rd and 4th centuries), 657 
Paul-Louis, 642 

Paul arid Virginia (Saint-Pierre), 637 
Paulina, Pompeia, wife of Seneca (ist cen- 
tury), 301, 306-307, 371 
Paulinus, Caius Suetonius, governor and gen- 
eral (fl. ist century), 271, 476 
Paulus, Heinrich Eberhard Gottlob, German 
Protestant theologian (1761-1851), 553 
Paulus, Julius, jurist (fl. 2nd and 3rd cen- 
turies), 392, 621, 634 

Paulus, Lucius Aemilius, consul and general 
O-116 B.c.), 50, 86, 92 

Paulus Macedonicus, Lucius Aemilius, gen- 
eral (229-160 B.C.), 86, 92, 96, loi 
Pauly, August, German classical philologist 
(1796-1845), 504* 

Pausanias, Greek traveler and topographer 
(fl. 2nd century), 324 

Pausanias, Greek sophist (fl. 2nd centuiyO, 
506 

Pavia {one. Ticinum), 49 
Pax, 287, 348 
Pax Augusta, 232 

Pax Romana, 194, 217, 218, 232, 325, 424, 473, 
631, 670 

Peace, (Goddess of, see Pax 
Peace, Temple of, 358 

Pedanius Secundus, prefect (fl. ist century), 
366, 397 

pederasty, ty8, 282, 369, 398, 408 
Pedius, Quintus, painter (fl. reign of Augus- 
tus), 352 

Pedum (Gallicano), 252 
Peel, Sir Robert, English statesman (1788- 
1850), 324 

Peisistratus, Athenian tyrant (605-527 b.c.), 
418 

Peleus, 157 

Peleus and Thetis” (Catullus), 157 
Peheitas, 342 
Pella, 483, 530, 577 
Peloponnesian War, 383 
Peloponnesus, 322, 454, 486, 497 
penalties, legal, 403-404 
penance, 600, 652 
Penates, 7, 58, 69 
Penelope, 256 

Pennsylvania Station (in New York), 360* 

Pentateuch, 535, 547 

Pentecost, 543, 579, 583 

Pentelicus, 487 

Pentheus, 178, 531 



INDEX 


737 


Pera, Brutus, aristocrat O-Z64 B.C.), 382 
Peraea, 535, $60 

Peregrinus, Greek Cynic philosopher (P-ifij), 
489 

Perennis, Praetorian Prefect (?-i85), 447 
perfumes, in Carthage, 41; under Rome, 132, 
134, 144, 266, 286, 298, 328-329, 337, 342, 345, 
37<5, 377. 438, 498 
Perga (Murtana), 582 

Pergamum (Bergama), 86, 94, 93, 114, 312, 334, 
348, 418, 430, 504, 505, 515, 516, 518, 534, 592 
Pergamum, library of, 635 
Periclean Age, 258, 351, 370, 418, 522 
Pericles, Athenian statesman (4957-429 b.c.), 
214, 428, 442 
Perinthus, 483 
Peripatetic, see Aristotelian 
Periphis of the Erythrean Sea, 326 
peristyUum, 343, 345 

Perpenna (or Perpema) Vento, Marcus, gen- 
eral ( 7-72 B.C.), 137 

Perpetua, Carthaginian Christian martyr (7- 
203), 649 

Perpetual Edict, see Praetorian Perpetual 
Edict 

Persephone, 525; Temple of, 516 
Perseus, last King of Macedon (reigned 178- 
168 B.C.), 86, 88, 96 
Perseus (mythology), 256 
Perseus and Androtneda, 349 
Persia, 77, 92*, 212, 320, 323, 329, 500, 524, 526, 
528-530, 540, 595, 605, 608, 623, 627, 628, 629, 
638, 639, 641, 644, 650, 653 
Persian Gulf, 413 

Persiles y Sigisnmnda (Cervantes), 637 
Persius Flaccus, Aulus, satirical poet (34-62), 

437 

Pertinax (Publius Helvius Pertinax), Roman 
emperor (7-193), 333> ^zo, 633, 665, 668 
Peru, 469, 600* 

Perusia (Perugia), 6, 205, 454 
perversion, see abortion, birth control, bi- 
sexuality, homosexuality, incest, pederasty 
Pervigilium Veneris, 637-^38 
Pessinus, 94, 513 

Peter, St., also called Simon or Simon Peter, 
apostle (7-647), 404, 555, 557, 563, 569, 575- 
579, 581-582, 583, 587, 590, 591-592, 604, 617, 
618, 646 

Peter, The First Epistle General of, 575, 577- 

578 

Petra, 508, 602 

Petrarch (Francesco Petrarca), Italian poet 
(1304-1374), 307 
Petronia, lex, 397 

Petronius Arbiter, Gaius, author (7-66), 60, 
247*, 276, 282, 295, 296-299, 312, 317, 319, 
333. 336, 347. 363. 368, 401, 435, 466, 636, 637 
Phaedo (Plato), 190 
Phaedra, 256 
Phaethon, 256 
Phainomena (Aratus), 584* 


phallic worship, 60, 66, 458 
Phanuel, 542 

Phaon, freedman (fl. tst century), 283 
Pharaohs, 5, 226, 266, 507 
Pharisees, 530, 532, 536-539, 545, 547, 562, 566, 
567-570. 576, 579-580, 586 
Phamaces, King of Pontus (7-47 B.c.), 188, 519 
Pharos, 188, 207 
Pharsalia (Lucan), 296 

Pharsalus (Pharsala), battle in 48 B.c., i8<r-i86, 
189, 208 

Pheidias, Greek sculptor (ca. 490-432 B.c.), 96, 
338, 354. 412, 442, 459, 486, 522 
Philadelphia, 508, 535 

Phile, municipal officer of Priene (fl. ist cen- 
tury b.c.), 514 

Philemon, Greek comic dramatist (361-263 
B.C.), 99 

Philemon, The Epistle of Paul to, 587* 
Philemon (mythology), 256 
Philip II, King of Macedon (382-336 B.c.), 483 
Philip V, King of Macedon (220-179 B.a), 51, 
85,86 

Philip, Asiarch (fl. 155), 648 
Philip, King of the Jews (fl. ist century), 535 
Philip the Arab (Marcus Julius Philippus 
“Arabs”), Roman emperor (reigned 244- 
249), 628 

Philippi, battle in 42 b.c., 203, 221, 358, 546, 583, 

585 

Philippians, The Epistle of Paul the Apostle 
to the, 587*, 591 
“Philippics,” Cicero’s, 201, 202 
Philippiopolis, 483 

Philo Judaeus, Jewish Hellenistic philosopher 
(ca. 20 B.c.-ca. 54 .^.D.), 424, 500, 546, 589, 
594-595. 604, 611, 614, 658 
Philodemus of Gadara, Epicurean philos- 
opher and poet (fl. ist century b.c.), 510 
Philosophus Platonicus, 467 
philosophy, 93, 95-97, 102, 104, io8, 113, 133, 
135, 136, 141, 144, 146-154, 163-166, 168, 190, 
196, 200, 203, 205, 231, 233, 244, 250, 251, 259, 
267, 269, 274, 286, 292, 295-296, 297-298, 299- 
307, 308, 310, 314, 324, 356, 367-368, 370, 373, 
376, 388-389, 392, 393, 406, 415, 417, 421, 424, 
425-428, 431, 432, 435, 438, 441, 443, 449, 465, 
467, 485-497, 500-502, 505-506, 509, 512, 513, 
514. 5>5. 521-522. 584, 594-595. 604, 607-615, 
620, 621, 629, 630, 633, 635-636, 661, 671; Lu- 
cretius’, 146-154; Cicero’s, 163-166; Horace’s, 
248-250; Ovid’s, 256; Pliny’s, 310-311; Mar- 
cus .Aurelius’, 425, 431, 443-446; Plutarch’s, 
485-486; Epictetus’, 490-494; Sextus Empiri- 
cus’, 494-495; Lucian’s, 495-497; Plotinus’, 
607-611 

Philostratus, Flavius, Greek rhetorician and 
biographer (fl. first half of 3rd century), 
488, 504,513,515, 526, 621 
Phoceans, 7 

Phoebe, servant of Julia ( ist century b.c.) , 23 1 
Phoebus, see Apollo 



INDEX 


738 

Phoenicia, 39, 41, 48, 105, 204, 240, 465, 463, 
a88, 500, 505, 510-511, 6-1 

Phormio (Terence), loi 
Phr)’gia, 94, 133, i 47 > 47 ^> 490 > 5 * 3 » 5 ^ 3 » 

528, 583, 595, 605,649 
Phyllis, 247 
Physeos, Peri, 148 

physical characteristics, of Etruscans, 6; of 
Romans, 69-70, 349-351, 372,415 
physicians, see medicine 
physics, 504 
Picenum, 182 
Pictones, 471* 

Pierson, Dutch biblical scholar, 554 
piety (pietas), 57, 58, 59, 60, 61, 64, 67, 148, 149, 
162, 238-242, 250, 251, 265, 357, 366, 371, 390. 
423, 425, 444, 447, 467' 484. 492-49T 497 . 5 ^* 5 . 
530. 537 . 599 . 625. 663 . 

Pilate, Pontius, Procurator of Judea (tl. nrsc 
half of ist century), 281, 571-573 
Pillars of Hercules, 40 
pinacotheca, 343 
Pincian hill, 132, 340 

piracy, 43, 47, 7®. •39"*4®. 167-168, 170, 

211, 219, 275, 325, 632 
Piraeus, 630 

Pisa {anc. Pisae), 78, 454 
Pisa, in the Peloponnesus, 454 
Pisidia, 513.582 
Piso fai^y, 249 

Piso, Caius Calpumius, conspirator (}- 6 s), 

266,282,296,306,316,371 
Piso, Cnaeus Calpumius, governor (?-2o aj).), 
262 

Piso, Lucius Calpumius, politician and gov- 
ernor (fl. ist century B.C.), t6i, 172, 174 
Pistoia (<2«c. Pistoria), 144 
Placentia (Piacenza), 47, 78, 454, 455 
Place Vendee, 412 

plague, 428-429, 432. 448. 638, 649, 666, 667 
Plancus, Lucius Alunatius, governor (fl. ist 
century B.C.), 233 

Plantianus, Praetorian Prefect (fl. 3rd cen- 
tury), 666 
plastic surgery, 313 
Plataea, 482, 483 

Plato, Greek philosopher (427-347 b.c.), 72, 
96, 136, 164, 165, 180, 196, 208, 243, 304, 389, 
421, 427, 485, 489, 494, 497, 501-502, 541, 607, 
608, 610, 61 1, 634, 658 

Platonic (Academic) philosophy, 95, 432,489, 
540, 588, 608, 61 1, 614, 635, 658 
Platonopolis, 608 

Plautus, Titus Maccius, comic dramatist (ca. 
254-184 B.C.), 7, 65, 70, 90, 93, 98, 99-101, 102, 
234 . 455 

Plebeian Games, 381 

plebeians, 21-31, 35, 37, 44. 80, 90, 93, 95, 98, 
eg, 102, 111-208, 216, 243, 252, 282, 286, 297, 
3 3 2-3 3 3 .3 3 5.3 39 - 340 . 34 ' -342.35 ‘ .384438446 
Pliny the Elder (Caius Plinius Secundus), 
naturalist and encyclopedist (23-79), 3. 'o. 


60, 269, 295, 308-311, 312, 313, 319, 320, 325, 
327. 528, 337. 347. 373. 439 . 453. 456. 457. 473 . 
507. 5'6 

Pliny the Younger (Caius Plinius Caecilius 
Secundus), author and orator (61-114?), 
252, 289, 295, 309, 311, 314, 315, 318, 320, 344, 
368, 371, 387, 402, 409, 411, 433, 435, 437. 438. 
439-441, 442, 454, 463, 520, 521, 554, 599, 648 
Plotina, Pompeia, wife of Trajan (fl. ist and 
2nd centuries), 409, 414, 442 
Plotinus, Egyptian Neoplatonist (203-270?), 
497, 501, 514, 608-61 1, 614-615, 635, 658 
plumbing, 343 

Plutarch, Greek biographer (46?-i20?), 41, 
72, 85, 113, 119-120, 124, 126, 127, 137, 140, 
185, 196, 197*, 304, 324, 367, 403, 424, 463, 
483-486, 487, 497, 546 
Pluto, 63, 84 

Pneimiatica (Hero), 504 
Po (anc. Padus), 4, 36, 37, 49, 120, 158, 235, 
250,320,454,455 

“Poem of Consolation to Flavius Ursus 
(Statius), 335 
Poetelia, lex, 400 

poetry, 74-75, 82, 97-102, 135, 146-158, 159, 
233-250, 252-258, zyi-iig, 289, 291, 295-296, 
315-318, 354, 369, 370, 376, 379, 386, 388-389, 
415, 422, 437-439, 440, 456, 486-487, 509-510, 
621, 637-658; Horace on, 249; see also 
comedy, drama, epic poetry, lyric poetry, 
pastoral poetry, satire, tragedy 
Poggio Bracciolini, Gian Francesco, Italian 
scholar (1380-1459), 154 
popoms, 544, 546, 548 
Poitiers (anc. Limonum), 471* 

Pola, 455 
Poland, 406 

Polemo (Polemon), Antonins, Greek sophist 
and rhetorician (fl. 2nd cenmry), 515-516 
police, 216, 220, 429, 668-669 
Politta, suicide in Nero’s reign (ist century), 

371 

Pollentia (Pollensa, Spain), 470 
Pollentia (Pollenza, Italy), 322 
pollice verso, 386-387 

PoUio, Asinius, orator, poet, and historian 
(76 B.C.-A.D. 4), 159, 161, 236 
PoUio, Vedius, friend of Augustus (?-i5 b.c.), 
376 

PoUux, 35, 62 

Polybius, Greek historian (2047-122? B.C.), 3, 
25. 34. 36. 41. 44. 46. 51. 7 '. 86, 90, 93, 96, 97. 
160, 251, 514, 520, 521 

Polycarp, Saint, Bishop of Smyrna and martyr 
(69 ?-i 55), 588, 617, 648 
Polycleitus, Greek sculptor (fl. 452-412 b.c.), 
96, 350, 355 

polygamy, in Parthia, 529; in Judea, 534 
Polygnotus, Greek painter (fl. 465 b.c.), 351 
Pomona, 59 

Pompeia, third wife of Caesar (ist century 
B.C.), 168, 172 



INDEX 


739 


Pompeii, lo, 35, 162, 289, 321-322, 338, 347, 352- 
354. 367. 370, 453. 456. 457-460, 546, 601, 634 
Pompey, Sextus (Sextus Pompeius Magnus), 
commander (?-35 b.c.), 189, 194, 205, 219, 

237 

Pompey the Great (Cnaeus Pompeius Mag- 
nus), general and triumvir (iod-48 b.c.), 

125, 128, 129, 130, 132, 133, 134, 136, 137-140. 
163, 168, 170-186, 188-190, 194-195, 197, 199, 
205, 211, 212, 214, 278, 293, 296, 340, 346, 347, 
349. 350, 360, 365, 373, 391, 419, 448, 482, 508, 

514. 517. 519. 524. 5 - 8 , 530-531. 632 

Pomponii, Roman clan, 255 
Pontia (Ponza), 264 

pontifex maxi?mis, 63, 388, 619, 672; Caesar as, 
147, 170, 172, 191, 193; Augustus as, i2S-2iyi 
Hadrian as, 415; Constantine as, 656 
pontiffs, 63, 66 

Pontine marshes, 193, 31 if, 410, 666 
Pontus, 122, 124, 132, 140, 170, 188, 216, 320, 
516-519, 520, 528, 578, 603, 629 
Pope, the, 11, 613, 617-619, 672 
Pope, Alexander, English poet (1688-1744), 
249*, 671 
Popilia, Via, 78 

Popilius, see Laenas, Caius PopHius 
Poppaea, see Sabina, Poppaea 
pojiulation, of Rome, in 560 b.c., 15; of Car- 
thage, 40; of Italy south of Rubicon, 8i; of 
Rome, in 2nd and 1st centuries b.c., 8t, 90, 

126, 159, 193; under the Principate, 221-222, 
363-366, 436; under the monarchy, 665-666; 
of Italy, 461; of Sicily, 464; of Germany, 
218; of Egypt, 499-500; of Syria, 510, 512; in 
Asia Minor, 513, 515, 520; of Palestine, 535 

Populonia, 6 
popultis Rommus, 21 
Porch, the, 75 

Porphyry, Syrian Neoplatonist philosopher 
(233-304?), 608, 635, 636* 

Porsena, Lars, chief magistrate of Clusium (fl. 

6th century b.c.), 17, 35 
Porta Capena, 340 
Porta Nigra, 474 
portents, see omens 

Portia, wii'e of Brutus (ist century b.c.), 196, 

T, ’^7 

Portia (in The Merchant of Venice), 303 
Portico of Octavia, 290 
Portland, third Duke of, Wm. Henry Caven- 
dish-Bentinck (1738-1809), 347t 
Portland, sixth Duke of, Wm. John Caven- 
dish-Bentinck (1857-1943), 347t 
Portland Vase, 347 
ports, see harbors 
Portugal, see Lusitania 
Portuguese (language), 73 
Portus Romanes, 270, 325, 453 
Poseidon, 63, 500 
Poseidonia, see Paestum 
Poseidonius, Greek Stoic philosopher (135?- 
51? B.C.), 141,164,308,471,472,490,503,514,521 


post, lyt, 323-324 
Postumian Way, 78 

Postumius, Aulus, dictator (496 b.c.), 35 
Postumus, pretender in Gaul (reigned 258- 
267), 629, 638 

Postumus (in Horace), 250 
Postumus (in Juvenal), 438 
Pothinus, vizier of Ptolemy XII (fl. ist cen- 
tury B.a), 186, 187 

Pothinus, Bishop of Lyons (87-177), 649 
Poussin, Nicolas, French painter (1594-1665), 

praefectus urbt, 216 
Praeneste (Palestrina), ii, 121, 125,454 
Praetorian Guard, 29*, 216, 263-264, 268, 269, 
272-273, 275, 283-285, 286, 293, 340, 384, 407- 
408, 427, 620-621, 625, 628, 634, 639, 653, 669 
Praetorian Perpetual Edict, 392, 416 
praetors, 24, 28, 29, 32, 125, 191; praetorian 
law, 57 
prandium, 70 

Praxiteles, Greek sculptor (385-ca. 320 b.c.), 
96, 338, 355 . 459 

prayer, 64, 67, 75, 311, 444, 495-496. 523, 525, 
537 . 547 , 568, 598. 599. 650. 651, 667 
predestination, 592 
prefects, 216-217 
Priam, 12 
Priapeia, 369 
Priapus, 60, 254, 354, 625 
prices, 184, 331, 632, 642-643 
Priene, 514 

priests, 63-64, 94, 226, 268, 291-292, 348, 349, 
388, 390, 425, 498-499, 52Z-526, 527, 331, 532, 
533 . 535 - 539 , 545 . 547 . 5 ^ 7 . 568, 570 - 57 i, 576, 
581, 586, 588*, 596, 598, 600-601, 606, 615, 651, 
656, 657, 66ot, 669, 670 
Prima Porta, 350, 354 
princeps senatus, 214, 216, 260 
Principate, the, 34, 209-621 
printing, 346-347 

Priscilla, Montanist heretic (2nd century), 
60s 

Priscus, Helvidius, Stoic philosopher (fl. 1st 
century), 279, 282, 286, 371, 426, j4i 
Priscus, Marius, governor in Africa (fl. ist 
and 2nd centuries), 441 
Probus (Marcus Aurelius Probus), Roman 
emperor (reigned 276-282), 638-639, 665 
proconsuls, see governors 
procurators, 216-217, 271, 281 
Prodicus, Greek philosopher (fl. 5th century 
B.C.), 486 

proletariat, 77, go, 111, 113, ii6-n8, 119, 130, 
142-145, 180, 189-192, 287, 333, 465, 596, 622, 
633, 656 

Prometheus Unbound (Shelley), 635 
promiscuity, in Carthage, 41; under Rome, 54, 
65,94, * 47 . (Caesar’s) i68, (Julia’s) 230-231, 
232, 254, 288, 290, 369, 390, 599 
Propertius, Sextus, poet (49-15 b.c.), 155, 234, 
235, 252, 253, 455 



INDEX 


740 

property, 57, 58, 68, 76-77, 113, 118, 125, 126, 
130, 160, 172, 189, 205, 211, 212, 220-221, 257, 
269, 370, 396, 397, 398, 399-400, 407, 479, 487, 
650, 651, 654-655, 657, 658, 670 
prophecy, see soothsaying 
prophets, 559, 562, 564, 567, 568, 576 
propitiation, 64, 65 
Propontis (Sea of Marmara), 516 
proscriptions, 125-126, 128, 130, 132, 141, 146- 
147, 167, 170, 185, 201-202, 212, 371, 373, 447- 
448, 628 

prose, 103-104, 108, 1 13, 158, 160-166, 234, 250- 
252, 258, 295-315, 319, 433-437. 439-446, 467- 
468, 483-486, 490-497, 505-507. 514. 520-522, 
546, 555-595, 606-616, 635-637, 662-663, 671 
Proserpina, 84; Rape of, 256 
prostitution, in Etruria, 7; under Rome, 68, 
89, 134, 135, 222-223, 244, 245, 267, 272, 276, 
285, 290, 297, 313, 317, 324, 328, 342, 352, 354, 
369,378,382,458,487,488,512,522,562,569,627 
prostration, 269, 280 

Protagoras, Greek philosopher (48i?-4ii 
B.C.), 494 
Protestantism, 592 

Protogenes, Greek painter (fl. 330-300 b.c.), 
338. 352. 355 
Provence, 472 
Proverbs, 540, 541 

Providence, Cicero on, 164; Seneca on, 304; 

Marcus Aurelius on, 444; see also God 
Providence, On (Seneca), 302 
provinces, 87-88,90, 107, 112, 114,116,118,121, 
125, 126, 129-130, 132, 140, 142, 171, 175, 177- 
178, 179, 190, 192, 193-194, 196, 200, 201, 205- 
206, 208, 211, 213, 214, 215, 216-217, 220-221, 
226, 228, 235, 261, 270-271, 275, 285-288, 293, 
302-303, 319, 320, 322, 330, 333, 350*, 373, 377, 
380, 404-406, 408, 410, 41 1, 413, 417-420, 423- 
424, 427, 434, 438, 441, 448-449, 453, 462-549, 
619, 621, 626-627, 632-633, 635, 640-645, 651, 
659, 661, 666, 668-669, 672 
Prusa (Brusa), 516, 521, 629 
Psalms, 559, 572-573 
Psalms of Solomon, 540 
Psyche, 353, 468 
Ptolemais (Menchieh), 498, 502 
Ptolemies, 186, 187, 208, 226, 327, 344, 498, 500, 
507, 631*, 641 

Ptolemy VI Philometor, King of Egj'pt (i8i- 
146 B.C.), 186 

Ptolemy XI Auletes or Neos Dionysos, King 
of Egypt (reigned 80-51 B.c.), 186-187 
Ptolemy XII, King of Egypt (reigned 51-47 
B.c.), 186-188 

Ptolemy XIII, King of Eg>’pt (reigned 47-43 
B.c.), 188, 189 

Ptolemy, Claudius, Greco-Egj^ptian astrono- 
mer, geographer, and geometer (fl. 127- 
151). 502-503, 507 

publicans, 126, 129, 139, 140, 141, 171, 192, 196, 

340. 463. 556. 562, 563. 569 

public debt, 79, 220, 287, 330, 337 


public lands, see ager publicus 

Publicola, Publius Valerius, consul (?-503 

B.C.), 16 

public urinals, 287 

public works, 88, 103, iii, 176, 192, 213, 216, 
219-220, 225, 270, 274, 287, 290-291, 326, 336, 
409, 410, 418-419, 423, 461, 499, 627, 633, 639, 
641, 668 

Pubhlia, wife of Cicero (fl. 1st century b.c.) , 
163 

Pttmpkinification (Seneca), see Apocolocyn- 
tosis 

Punchinello (Punch), 74 
Punic, 621 

Punic Wars, 43, 91, 218, 618; First, 43-46, 70, 
74, 78, 330, 469; Second, 48-54, 70, 80, 105, 
252, 455, 469; Third, 105-108 
punishment, in the early Republic, 57 
Pupienus (Marcus Clodius Pupienus Maxi- 
mus), Roman emperor (?-238),62S 
purgatory, 241-242, 243, 485, 497, 615 
purification, 29, 63, 64, 65, 67, 524-525, 527, 
560, 586, 599, 607, 609, 618; see also baptism 
Puritans, 535 

Puteoli (Pozzuoli), 78, 162, 218, 322, 324, 325, 
326, 330, 346, 389, 456, 457, 546, 602 
Pydna (battle, 168 B.c.), 86, 96 
Pylades of Cilicia, artist in pantomime (fl. end 
of 1st century b.c.), 378 
Pyramids, 328, 499 
Pyramus, 256 
Pyrenees, 49, 1 19, 470 
Pyrrha, 247 

Pyrrho, Greek philosopher (365-275 b.c.), 
494. 495 

Pyrrhus, King of Epirus (318-272 b.c.), 28, 29, 
37.38,71.92.98. 104 

Pythagoras, Greek philosopher (fl. 540-510 
b.c.), 98, 165, 246, 390, 497, 507, 525, 607, 608* 
Pythagoreanism, 242, 301, 343, 390, 525-526, 
537 , 609 

Pjtheas, Greek navigator (fl. ca. 350 b.c.), 

475-476 

Pythian games, 283, 486-487 

Q 

quacks, 312 
Quadi, 429, 431, 432 

Quadratus, Christian apologist (fl. 2nd cen- 
tury), 611 

Quaestiones (Papinian), 634 
Quaestiones Naturales (Seneca), 303, 307-308, 
3 “ 

quaestors, 28, 29*, 191 
Quebec, 406 

Quietus, Quintus Lusius, general of Trajan 
(?-ii8), 413, 414 

Quintilian (Marcus Fabius Quintilianus), 
rhetorician (ca. 40-118?), 103, 295, 299, 302, 
3 " 3 - 3 i 5 , 3‘6, 319, 356, 367, 380,403, 439,440 
Quirinal, 12*, 317, 340, 411 



INDEX 741 


Quirinius, Publius Sulpicius, governor of 
Syria (?-2i a.d.), 558 
Quirinus, 13 
Quirites, 13 

R 

rabbis, 537-539, 545, 547-548, 5^4 _ 

Rabelais, Frangois, French writer (1490?- 
1553), 69, 100 

Rabirius, architect (fl. ist century), 345 
Racine, Jean Baptiste, French dramatist, 
(1639-1699), 302, 412 
Raetia, 217-218, 429, 480 
Ram, 298 

Raphia (Rafa), 508, 530 
Ravenna, ii, 78, 325, 326,410,455 
readings, 234, 296 
real estate, see property 
realism (art), 339, 349, 350, 351, 353, 361,412, 
442-443, 459-4^, 634-635, 671 
Reate (Rieti), 102, 286, 288 
Red Sea imc. Sinus Arabicus), 325, 413, 499, 
507, 508, 516, 529 
Reformation, 592 

Refutation of All Heresies (Hippolytus), 618 
Regulus, Marcus Adlius, general (?-ca. 250 
B.C.), 44-45, 183 
Regulus (in Pliny), 438 
Reid, James Smith, English classical scholar 
(1846-1926), 665 

Reimarus, Hermann Samuel, German scholar 
(1694-1768), 553 

reincarnation, 242, 390, 497, 525, 526, 609 
reliefs, 229, 338, 347-349, 361, 412, 427, 442-443, 
453, 455, 474, 601, 635, 662 
religion, in Etruria, 7-8, 18; in Carthage, 41-42; 
in Germany, 479; before the Principate, 13, 
18, 30, 31, 56, 58-67, 72, 93-97, 102, 104, 108, 
157, 163-165, 193, 214; under the Principate, 
222, 225-227, 238-239, 248, 251, 256-257, 259, 
266, 269, 291-292, 299, 335, 354, 365-366, 371, 
372, 388-390, 426, 429, 443, 449, 486, 488, 497, 
512, 515, 522-527, 535-542, 550-619; under the 
monarchy, 625, 628, 639, 640, 646-664, 667- 
668; Judaism, 535-542; Christianity, 550-619, 
646-664, 667-668; Lucretius on, 147-154; 
Varro on, 159-160; Cicero on, 161, 164-165; 
Caesar and, 193; in Virgil, 242-243; in 
Horace, 248-250; in Livy, 251, 256-257; 
Nero’s, 276; Domitian’s, 292; Hadrian’s, 415; 
Antoninus Pius’, 423 ; Alarcus Aurelius’, 425- 
426, 444; Tacitus’, 435-436; in The Golden 
Ass, 467-468; Plutarch’s, 484-485; Demonax 
on, 489; Epictems’, 492-494; Philo’s 501-502; 
Dion Chrysostomus on, 522 
Rembrandt van Rijn (Rembrandt Harmens- 
zoon van Rijn), Dutch painter (1606-1669), 
355 

Retnedia Amoris (Ovid), 255 
Remi, 471* 

Remus, twin of Romulus (8th century b.c.), 
12, 82, 241 


Renaissance, 4, 95, 243, 258, 307, 352, 353, 356, 
406, 505, 661, 672 

Renan, Ernest, French Orientalist and critic 
(1823-1892), 425, 554, 556 
Republic, the Roman, 15-208, 213, 214, 242, 
251, 260, 261, 264, 286, 330, 335, 352, 373, 374, 
379, Chap. XVIII, passim, 436, 442, 462, 469 
Republic (Cicero), see Republica, De 
Republic (Plato), 608 
Republic, Plato’s, 427 
Republica, De (Cicero), 163*, 165 
republicanism, of Cato the Younger, 135, 136 
Rerum Natura, De (Lucretius), 148-154, 239 
Re Rustica, De (Cato the Elder), 103-104 
Re Rustica,De (Columella), 319 
Re Rustica, De (Varro) , see Country Life, On 
Resemblances, 243 
Responsa (Papinian), 634 
Resting Mercury, 459 

resurrection, 94, 523-526, 573-574, 575, 585, 
59Z, 595. 601, 604*, 605, 607 
Revelation of St. John the Divine, The, 592- 

595 , 616 

revolution, to8, 111-208, 391, 604*, 631, 666 
Rhea Silvia, mother of Romulus and Remus 
(8th century B.C.), 12 
Rhegium (Reggio), 35, 44, 231, 377, 455 
Rheims (one. Durocortorum), 324, 471* 
rhetoric, 29,95, *4b 160-162, 167, 168, 169, 

236, 244, 250, 251, 258, 287, 295-296, 301, 313, 
317, 324, 367-368, 423, 423, 434, 436, 437, 438, 
441, 465, 467.470. 486-490. 510, 512. 5 > 4 . 515. 
521-522, 612, 661 

Rhine (iinc. Rhenus), 6, 118, 174-176, 178, 179, 
194, 217-218, 291, 417, 431, 441, 470, 474, 475, 
478, 479, 480, 523, 627, 628, 631*, 639, 653 
Rhineland, 479, 480 

Rhodes, 86, 96, 97, 105, 133, 139, 141, 168, 187, 
203, 231, 259, 329, 368, 388, 418, 462, 490, 512, 
514. 516, 534, 588*, 630 
Rhone {anc. Rhodanus), 6, 470, 474 
Richardson, Samuel, English novelist (1689- 
17611,637 

Rimini, see Ariminum 
Rio Tinto, see Minas de Rio Tinto 
ritual, 64, 65, 67, 94, 147-148, 149, 226, 242, 354, 
388, 389,425, 523-525, 527, 536, 548, 575, 578- 
579, 582, 595, 599, 602, 618-619, 626, 656 
roads, 77-78, 116, 193, 219, 291, 324, 326-327, 
340-341, 343, 410, 411, 417. 453. 464. 465. 466, 
469473.477480499.5 ' 2,579,602,627,63 2,67 1 
Robertson, John Mackinnon, British journal- 
ist and scholar (1856-1933), 554 
Roland de la Platiere, A^Iarie Jeanne, French 
Girondist (1754-1793), 484 
Roma, 381, 388, 389 ! 

Roman Catholics, 66 
Romance languages, 73, 671 
Romanesque architecture, 421 
Roman Games, 381 

Romans, The Epistle of Paul the Apostle to 
die, 554, 587* 



INDEX 


742 

Romanticism, 249, 258 
Rome, founding of, 11-13-, city of, in 2nd and 
3rd centuries b.c., 81-82, 92-93; under 
Augustus, 219-220; burning and rebuilding, 
280-281; fire and plague, 289; Flavian Rome, 
338-362; under Hadrian, 420-421 
Rome, Council of, 61 8 

Rome, History of (Dion Cassius Cocceianus), 
636 

Romeo, 255 

Romulus, first King of Rome (8th century 
B.C.), 12, 13, ist. j8, 21, 82, 120, 136, 145, 233, 
241, 359. 636 

Romulus, House of, 4, 359 
Romulus Augustulus (Flavius MomyUus 
Romulus Augustus), Roman emperor in the 
West (?-476), 670 

Roscius Callus, Quintus, comedian (?-62 
B.C.), 160, 378 

Rostovtzeff, Michael, American historian (b. 

1870) , 642 
rostrum, 340 
rotation of crops, 76, 320 
Rothschild, Meyer Anselm, Jewbh banker 
(1743-1812), 131 
Rouen {me. Rotomagus), 324 
Rousseau, Jean Jacques, French philosopher 
(1712-1778), 152, 367, 440 
Rubens, Peter Paul, Flemish painter (1577- 
1640), 354 

Rubicon (Fiumicino), 48. 8t, 163, 182,634 
Rufus, Caesetius, proscribed by Antony (?- 
43 B.C.), 202 

Rufus, Corellius, friend of Pliny the Younger 
(?-0?), 311 

Rufus, Musonius, Stoic philosopher (fl. ist 
century), 282, 300-301, 490, 521 
Rufus, Virginius, governor and guardian of 
Pliny the Younger ( 14-97) , 439 
Rufus of Ephesus, Greek physician (fl. 98- 

ny). 505 

Ruins of Empire ( Volney), 553 
Rumania, 410, 480 
Rumanian, 73 

Russia, 112, 218, 326, 448, 478, 520, 528, 669 
Rusticus, Quintus Junius, Stoic philosopher 
(fl. 2nd century), 425 
Rutuli, 15, 240 

S 

Saba (Bif». Sheba), 308 
Sabbath, 598, 599 
Sabellians, 605 
Sabidius, 318 

Sabina, Poppaea, wife of Nero (7-65), 277, 
279-282, 366, 372-373 

Sabina, Vivia, wife of Hadrian (?-i38), 414, 
419, 442,624 
Sabine (language), 274 

Sabines, 3, 12, 13, 14, 21, 35, 244, 246, 254, 286, 
288; rape of women, 13 


Sabinus, Poppaeus, accused of conspiracy (?- 
27 A.D.), 264 
Sabrata, 465 

Saccas, Ammonius, Alexandrian Neoplatonist 
(fl. 3rd century), 608, 614 
sacraments, seven, 600, 602, 658 
Sacra Via (Sacred Way), 341 
Sacred History (Euhemerus), 98 
Sacred Mount, 22 

sacrifice, in Etruria, 7; under Rome, 32, 39, 60, 
63-64, 65, 76, 83, 100, 104, 149, 164, 197, 239, 
265, 290, 292, 354, 381, 388, 429, 444, 522, 524- 
323, 326, 531, 533, 547, 370, 383, 588, 599-600, 
648, 651 

Sadducees, 536-338, 543, 362, 376 
sadism, Caligula’s, 267 
Saguntum (Sagunto), 47, 48 
Sahara, 40, 217, 448, 464, 466 
St. Barbara, Baths of, 474 
St. Mark’s, in Venice, 351 
St. Peter’s, in Rome, 18, 420, 421, 378, 633, 661 
Saint-Pierre, Jacques Henri Bemardin de, 
French writer of romance (1737-1814), 637 
St. Quentin (anc. Augusta Veromanduo- 
rum),474 
Sais, 498 

Salamis (in Cyprus), 196 

Salamis (island), naval battle in 480 B.c., 383 

Salaria, Via, 283 

Salernum (Salerno), 436 

Salii, 63 

Sallust (Caius Sallustius Crispus), historian 
(86-33 B-C-), 42. *23, J42-144, 146, 160, 190, 
233. 340, 436, 455. 557 
“Sallust, Flouse of,” 333 
Salome, daughter of Herodias (ist century), 
560 

Salome, visitor at the tomb of Jesus, 573 
Salome Alexandra, Queen of the Jews 
(reigned 78-69 b.c.), 530 
Salona (Spalato), 480 
salons, 113, 131-132, 15^, 230, 234, 279, 621 
Salvius, leader of slave rebellion (end of 2nd 
cenmry b.c.), 12 i 
Samaria, 530, 576, 377, 604, 61 1 
Samaria-Sebaste (Sebusdeh), 308 
Samaritans, 535, 567 
Samaritis, 535 

Samnites, 33, 37, 38, 43, 51, 125, 319 

Sanuiium, 455 

Samos, 133, 139 

Samosata, 322, 493, 513 

Samothrace, 139 

sanctuary, 398, 318 

Sanhedrin, 536, 539, 343, 347-548, 568, 570-571, 
576. 580, 586 

sanitation, see sewage system 
San Lorenzo, Church of, 427* 

San Lorenzo outside the Walls, Church of, 
662 

San Paolo fuori le Alura, Basilica of, 591 
Sanskrit, 73 



INDEX 


743 


Santa Alaria degli Angeli, Church of, 635 
Sadne {mic. Arar), 470, 474 
Sappho, Greek poet (fl. 7th century b.c.), 155, 
156, 158, Z47, 256 
Saracens, 658 

Saragossa (one. Caesaraugusta), 504 
Sardinia, 38, 40, 43, 46, 52, 53, 97, lu, 112, 279, 
365*. 447. 463-464 
Sardis, 516, 546, 592 
Sarmatians, 43 1, 432, 480, 630, 669 
Sarmizegetusa, 410, 431, 480 
Sarsina, 455 
Sassanids, 530, 627, 641 

Satan,524,540,589,59i,593,595,599,6o(5,6i4,(S63 
satire, 73, 74, 97, 99, 235, 241, 245-246, 248, 250, 
275. 295. 296-299, 312, 317-318, 333, 369, 437- 
439,509, 671 

Satires (Horace), 245-246, 248, 250 
Saturn, 59, 61, 63, 66, 205, 225, 237, 242, 253, 
358, 500 

Saturn (planet), 309 
Saturn, Temple of, 341, 358 
Saturnalia, 66 
Saturnian verse, 74, 98 

Satwrwiaregwfl, 61, 66, 205, 225, 236-237, 242, 253 
Satuminus, Antoninus, governor (fl. ist cen- 
tury), 291, 292 

Satuminus, Caius Sentius, governor of Syria 
(fl. ist century B.c.), 558 
Saturninus, Lucius Appuleius, radical leader 
(?-ioo B.C.), 120, 519 

Satuminus, Pompeius, friend of Pliny the 
Younger (fl. ist and 2nd centuries), 441 
Satyricon (Petronius), 296-299,466 
Save, 410, 480, 640 
Saviour, see Messiah 
Saxa Rubra, 654 

Scaevola, Caius Mucius, hero (fl. 6th century 
B.C.), 385 

Scaevola, Publius Mucius, statesman and 
lawyer (fl. second half of 2nd century b.c.), 

391 

Scaevola, Quintus Mucius, jurist (?-82 b.c.), 
391, 406 

Scaevola, Quintus Mucius, jurist (znd-ist cen- 
turies B.C.), 141, 159, 391, 406 
Scaliger, Joseph Justus, French critic and 
scholar (1540-1609), 302 
Scandinavia, 326 
Scandinavians, 475 
Scantinia, lex, 398 

Scaurus, Marcus Aemilius, general and gov- 
ernor (fl. ist century b.c.), 133, 334, 482 
schism, 618, 657-658 
Schola Medicorum, 312 

scholarship, 158-161, 234, 250, 252, 269, 272, 
415. 635-636 
Scholasticism, 548 
schools, see education 

Schweitzer, Albert, Alsatian philosopher, the- 
ologian, physician, and musician (b. 1875), 

556 


science, 75, 102, 108, (in Lucretius) 148-154, 
233. 269, 307-313, 314, 356, 392, 393, 406, 500, 
502-507, 514, 520-521, 671 
Scipio, Publius Cornelius, general, father of 
Scipio Africanus Major (?-2ii b.c.), 49, 52, 
9 '. 

Scipio Aemilianus Africanus Minor, Publius 
Cornelius, general (ca. 185-129 B.c.), 41, 57, 
87,91,96-97, loi, 107, 113, 114, 115, 379, 490 
Scipio Africanus, Publius Cornelius, son of 
Scipio Africanus (2nd cenmry b.c.), 96 
Scipio Africanus Maior, Publius Cornelius, 
general (234-183 b.c.), 51, 52-55, 57, 82, 85, 
86, 91, 92, 94, 96, 97, 104, 1 13, 424 
Scipio Asiaticus, Lucius Cornelius, general (fl. 

190B.C.), 86, 91, 104,113 
Scipio, Calvus Cneius Cornelius, general (?- 
21 1 B.C.), 52 

Scipio Nasica Corculum, Publius Cornelius 

(fl. 158 B.C.), 66 

Scipio Nasica Serapio, Publius Cornelius, 
senator (fl. 133 b.c.), 115 
Scipionic circle, 96-97, loi, 104, 113 
Scipios, patrician family, 85, 86, 97, 372, 469 
Scopas, Greek sculptor (400-ca. 340 b.c.), 96, 
35 b 358 

Scotland (anc. Caledonia), 36, 291, 406, 448, 
476, 622, 669 

Scribes, 536, 538, 567, 568, 662 
Scribonia, second wife of Augustus (fl. ist 
century b.c.), 205, 229 
Scriptures, see Bible 

Scudery, Madeleine de, French novelist 
(1607-1701), 637 

sculpture, Etmscan, 9-10, 18; Carthaginian, 41, 
42; Pompeian, 459-460; Italian, 461; Sicilian, 
464, 465; Christian, 601; under Rome, 18, 71, 
82, 92, 133, 141, 227, 233, 278, 291, 293, 310, 
338-346 passim, 347-351, 352-362 passim, 372, 
376, 384. 386, 412, 414, 418, 442-443> 453> 480, 
511-512, 514, 532, 634-635, 661-662, 671 
Scylla, 602 

Scythia, 194, 218, 429, 483, 496, 500, 520, 528, 
629 

Secular Games, see ludi saeculares 
Secundini Family, Tomb of the, 474 
Segovia, 470 

Seine {one. Sequana), 175, 470, 523 
Sejanus, Lucius Aelius, prefect of the Prae- 
torian Guard (?-3i aj).), 263-264, 365*, 447 
Seleucia, 96, 428, 528, 529, 546, 6oz 
Seleucia Pieria, 5 1 2 
Seleucids, 507, 51 1, 528-530, 536 
Seleucus IV Philopator, King of Syria (187- 
175 B.C.), 86 
Selinus, 413 
semaphores, 324 
Semites, 41, 245, 530 
Sempronian Law, 144 
Senaculum, 624 

Senate, 13, 21-31, 34, 37, 44, 45, 49-52, 70, 71, 
76, 85, 86, 89, 90-91, 93-94, 95, 96, 103, 105- 



INDEX 


744 

Senate {continued) 

107, III, 114-118, 120-126, 129, 130, 136-140, 
143-145, 160, 165, 170-175, 180, 181-184, ' 

190-191, 193-201, 205, 206, 212-216, 221, 226, 
232, 250, 260-264, 265, 266, 268-271, 273, 275- 
277, 279, 280, 283-287, 289, 291-293, 301, 331, 
332, 336, 348, 364- 393. 395. 397. 407. 4"9. 4i3. 
414-415, 416, 423, 427, 433, 446, 447, 449, 463, 
519,620,621,623-628,633,636,638-640,668-669 

Seneca, -^$1 

Seneca, Lucius Annaeus, Stoic philosopher 
(4? B.C.-AJ). 65), 95, 97, 154, 239, 260, 267, 
273, 274, 275-279, 282, 295, 296, 299, 301-308, 
311. 315, 316, 319, 324, 333, 334, 335, 338, 343, 
350, 351. 363. 367. 369. 370. 371. 377. 379. 380. 

387,388,408,435436439,456,469,470478,671 

Seneca, Marcus Annaeus, rhetorician (fl. ist 
century b.c.), 295, 296, 301, 319, 369, 379,470 
Senectute, De (Cicero), 108, 163* 

Senlis (iiwc. Augustomagus),474 
Senones, 471* 

Sens (one. Agendicum, later Senones), 471* 
sententiae, 296 

Sentinum (battle, 295 b.c.), 37 
Sepphoris, 543 

Sepnmius Severus (Lucius Septimius Se- 
verus), Roman emperor (146-211), 330, 336, 
465, 620-622, 623, 628, 631*, 632, 633, 635, 
^9, 666, 669 

Septimius Severus, Arch of, 623, 635 
Septimontium, 12-13 
“Septizonium,” 635 
Septuagint, 541, 614 
Serapis, 635 

Serapis, Temple of (Rome), 291, 635 
Serapis, Temple of (Serapeum), 500 
Serbia, 480 
Serdica (Sofia), 483 

serfdom, 6, 39, 3 19, 473, 479, 529, 644, 668-669 
sennones, 245 

Sertorius, Quintus, general (?-72 B.C.), 136-137 
Servian census, 27 
Servian constitution, 123 
Servile Wars, 141; First, 80, 112; Second, 120- 
121 

Servilia, mistress of Caesar and mother of 
Brutus (ist century B.c.) , 168, 196 
Servdlian Gardens, 283 

Servius Tullius, sixth King of Rome (fl. 6th 
century b.c.), 14-15, 340 
Seuthes and Son, Alexandrian banking firm, 
33 ' 

Seven against Thebes, 316 
Severus (Flavius Valerius Severus), Roman 
emperor (i-joj), 653 
Severus, architect (fl. ist century), 345 
Seville (one. Flispalis), 192, 470 
sewage system, 81, 220, 326, 356, 439, 671 
Sextius, Lucius, tribune and consul (fl. 376- 
366 B.C.), 24 

Sextus of Chaeronea, Greek Stoic philosopher 
(fl. 2nd century), 425-426 


Sextus Empiricus, Greek philosopher (fl. end 
of 2nd century), 494-495 
sexual intercourse, recommended by Pliny, 
310; among the Essenes, 537 
sexual hfe, see abortion, adultery, betrothal, 
birth control, bisexuality, celibacy, concu- 
binage, courtesans, divorce, effeminacy, 
emasculation, eunuchs, hermaphrodites, 
hetairai, homosexuality, incest, marriage, 
morals, pederasty, polygamy, promiscuity, 
prostitution, venereal disease 
Shakespeare, William (1564-1616), 16*, too, 
147.241.302,435,484,617 
Shalmaneser 111, King of Assyria (reigned 
859-824 B.C.), 39 

Shammai, Jewish rabbi (fl. ist century b.c.), 

539. 547 
Shansi, 329 

Shaosyant, see Mithras 

Shapur I, King of Persia (reigned 242-271), 
605, 629 

share-croppers, 104 

shaving, in Carthage, 41; in Rome, 70, 372; 
Christians and, 599 

Shelley, Percy Bysshe, English poet (1792- 
1822), 147, 311,635 

Shemaya, Jewish rabbi (fl. ist century b.c.), 
538 

Shepherd of Hermas, The, 599 
shipbuilding, 220, 325, 513, 516 
ships, 324-326, 329, 516 
shrines, 75, 79, 335 
Sibyl, Cumean, 64, 236-237, 240-241 
Sibylline Books, 64, 94, 236 
Sibylline oracle, 197 
Sicels, 4 

Sicily, 4, 38, 40, 43, 44, 45, 52, 54, 62, 66, 77, 92. 
106, 107, III, 1 12, 120, 138, 141, 183, 216, 234, 
237. 254. 297. 3 ‘o. 3“. 325. 328, 339,418,455, 
464,518,523,602, 629,631 
Sidon, 39, 329, 347, 510, 511, 534 
Sidonius, see ApolUnaris Sidonius 
Silanus, senator (fl. ist century b.c.), 144 
Sdanus, Marcus Junius, poisoned by Agrip- 
pina (14-54), 273 

Silas, colleague of St. Paul (ist century), 583 
Silchester (one. Calleva Atrebatum), 477 
Silenus, 354 

Silius, Caius, lover of Messalina (?-48), 272 
silk, 329, 373, 510, 514, 624, 640 
Silvae (Statius), 316 
Silvanus, 60, 238-239 
Silver Age, 235, 295-318, 319 
silverware, 346, 349, 373, 529, 624 
Silvester I, Roman Pope (reigned 314-335). 
659 

Simeon (New Testament), 542 
Simeon, Bishop of Jerusalem and martyr (87 
B.c. i’-A.D. 107?), 648 
Simon, Christ’s brother, 558 
Simon Magus, Samaritan sorcerer (ist cen- 
tury), 577, 604 



INDEX 745 


simony, 604 

Singidunum, see Belgrade 
Sinope (Sinob), 517, 518, 520, 604 
Sinuessa (Rocca di Mandragone), 113 
Sirach, 539 

Sirmio (Sirmione), 158 

Sirmium (Mitrovica), 480, 633, 640 

Siro the Epicurean, philosopher in Naples (fl. 

ist century b.c.), 236 
Sixtus II, Roman Pope (257-258), 650 
skepticism, 308, 388-389, 489, 494-497, 500, 522; 
Cicero’s, 164-165; Augustus’, 225-228; 
Horace’s, 248; Ovid’s, 256; Vespasian’s, 287, 
311; Hadrian’s, 415, 418, 648; Lucian’s, 495- 
497; Constantine’s, 655-656 
slavery, in Etruria, 6; in Carthage, 39, 52; in 
Greece, 86; in Germany, 479; under Rome, 
57. 58, <53, 66, 71, 76, 77, 80, 8i, 87, 88, 95, 
99, 103-104, 105, 107, 111-113, 117, 120-121, 
124, 130, 133, 134, 137-138, 143, 170, 175, 177, 
184, 189, 190, 192, 202, 203-204, 205, 211, 215, 
220, 221-222, 245*, 255, 261, 267, 270, 279, 290, 
297-298, 301, 319, 320, 322, 323, 324, 326, 328- 
329. 332. 333-335. 33<5, 338, 342, 364, 366, 374- 
375. 380. 385-387. 395. 397-398, 400, 403. 4'^ 
424, 429, 441, 448, 462-463, 464, 465, 469, 473, 
476, 490, 493, 499, 513, 515, 516, 522, 529, 531, 
53*5, 543, 545, 548, 566, 589. 590. 396, 631-6}!, 
634, 644, 665, 667, 668; barbarian and for- 
eign, 629 

slums, 90, III, 132, 280, 342, 366, 465, 481, 510 
Smith, William Benjamin, American educator 
(1850-1934), 554 
Smyrna, see Tralles 

Soaemias, Julia, daughter of Julia Maesa and 
mother of Elagabalus (?-222), 623-625 
soap, 375 

social service, 371 
Social War, 79, 122, 125, 146, 182 
Socrates, Athenian philosopher (469-399 b.c.), 
104, 258, 306, 491, 557, 646 
Socrates, brother of Nicomedes III (fl. ist 
century b.c.), 518 

sod, 76, 77, 238, 319-321, 339, 456, 457, 464, 476, 
482, 51 1, 513, 631, 665 

Soissons (cmc, Noviodunum), 177, 471*, 474 
solarium, 343 

Solomon, King of the Jews (reigned 974-937 
B.C.), 530 

Solon, Athenian lawgiver (6387-559? b.c.), 23, 
32, 83, 392, 405 
Solway Firth, 417, 476 

soothsaying, 60, 63-64, 147, ,64, 197, 245, 278, 
292,3^,311,388,419429,485,514,537,559,624 
Sophistic, Second, 488-489 
Sophists, 497, 515 

Sophists of the Dinner Table (Athenaeus of 
Naucratis), see Deipnosophists 
Soranus of Ephesus, Greek writer on medi- 
cine (fl. 98-138), 505 
Sorrento, see Surrentum 
Sorrows (Ovid), see Tristia 


Sotion, Pythagorean philosopher (fl. ist cen- 
tury), 301 

soul, Lucretius on, 152; Seneca on, 304-305; 

Plotinus on, 608-610; Origen on, 615 
South Africa, 406 

Spain, 36, 39, 40, 43, 46, 47, 48, 50, 52-53, 54, 
82, 86, 87-88, 96, 107, 111, 112, 113, 119, 126, 
129, 136-137, 138, 169, 170, 176, 179, 183-184, 
188, 189, 190, 192, 200, 217, 218, 219, 252, 283, 
285, 308, 318, 319, 322, 323, 329, 330, 346, 348, 
366, 406, 408, 410, 414, 417, 431, 468-470, 471, 
472. 473. 475. 481, 513. 514. 521. 585. 590. 602, 
632, 638, 669-670, 671 
Spalato (one. Spalatum), 644 
Spanish, 73, 295 

Spiarta, 87, 200, 387, 482, 487, 519, 534, 630 
Spartacus, slave leader (?-7i b.c.), 137-138 
Spartianus, Aelius, biographer (fl. 4th cen- 
tury), 414, 416, 419 
Spectaculis, De (Tertullian), 612-613 
speedometers, 356 

Spendius, Campanian slave and rebel leader 
(fl. 241-237 B.C.), 46 

Spenser, Edmund, English poet (t552?-i599), 
258 

spinning, 58, 77, 213, 230, 321-322, 371 
Spinoza, Baruch, Dutch Jewish phUosopher 
(1632-1677), 580 

Spinther, Publius, senator (fl. ist century), 
33« 

spoils, 82-83, 87, 88, 90, 92, 94, 96, 103, 120, 123, 
125, 129-130, 141, 169-170, 175-177. 183, 194, 
196, 205, 211, 213, 219, 261, 287, 288, 293, 331, 
349. 365. 4>o. 482, 543. 546. 623, 629 
sports, see athletics, games 
Sporus, youth married by Nero ( i st century) , 
282 

Spring, 354 

Spurinna Vestritius, soothsayer (fl. ist cen- 
tury B.C.), 197 

Stabiae (Castellammare di Stabia), 354 
stadiums, 360, 362, 378, 382, 487 
stage, see theater 
statiOy 324 

Statius, Publius Papinius, poet (ca. 6i-ca. 96), 
289, 291, 295, 315-318, 335, 370, 456 
statuary, see sculpture 
Statue of Liberty, 351* 

Steele, Sir Richard, English essayist and dram- 
atist (1672-1729), 304 
stenography, 466 
Stephanos (Meleager), 509 
Stephen I, Roman Pope (reigned 254-257), 
618 

Stephen, first Christian martyr (?-3o?), 576, 
580 

Sterculus, 59 

sterility, 212, 229, 366, 449, 480, 482, 666 
Stertinius, Quintus, physician (fl. ist cen- 
tury), 312 

Stiheho, general (7-408), 358 
Stoa, Zeno’s, 421, 490, 497 



index 


746 

Stoicism, 63, 95, 97, 135, 141, 144, 154*, 164, 
165, 166, 190, 196, 249, 250, 274, 279, 286, 292, 
300-307, 335, 370, 389, 392,405, 409, 415, 422, 
425-427, 431, 432, 449, 485, 489-494, 495, 497, 
502, 514, 521-522, 541, 588, 554, 598, 602, 613, 
614, 658, 671 

stoicism, 57, 68, 88, 133, 134*, 225, 230, 251, 260, 
274, 282, 301, 307, 408, 426, 468, 667 
Stone Age, New, 4, 1 1, 471 
Stone Age, Old, 4, 468, 471 
Strabo, Greek geographer (63 b.c.?-a.d. 24^), 
321, 329, 347, 424, 455, 468, 471, 477, 473, 483, 
5'4o'i6, 520-521, 546 

Strabo of Sardis, Greek anthologist (fl. 50 
B.C.), 509* 

Strasbourg, see Argentoratum 
Strategamata (Frontinus), 328 
Strauss, David Friedrich, German rationalis- 
tic theologian (1808-1874), 553 
streets, Roman, 81, 281, 341-332, 477, 653; of 
Italy, 461; of Petra, 508; of Antioch, 512; 
of Rhodes, 514; of Ephesus, 515 
strikes, 80, 4^9 
Stromateis (Origen), 614 
Styx, 522 

Sublicius, Pons, 327 
Sublime, On the (Longinus), 636 
Subura, the, 167, 341-342 
Succubo, 425 
Suessiones, 175, 471* 

Suetonius Tranquillus, Caius, historian (70?- 
121?), 167, 188, 197, 212, 215, 218, 221, 227, 
228, 261, 264, 266, 267, 272, 275, 280*, 283, 
286, 287, 293, 350, 414, 441, 554 
Suez, 521 
Sufetula, 465 

suicide, 190, 203, 207-208, 218, 240, 262, 264, 
282, 284, 296, 300, 301, 306-307, 311, 371, 386, 
398-399, 422, 478, 489, 516, 623, 654 
Suihus, Pubbus, delator (fl. ist century), 302- 

303 . 

Sulla, Lucius Cornelius (Felix), dictator (138- 
78 B.C.), 31, 91, 92, I 19, I22-I27, 128, 130, I5I, 
132, 134, 138, I39-I4O, I41, 142, 167, 168, 169, 
170, 189, 195, 2II, 391, 448,457, 483, 519 
Sulmo (Soloma), 253-254, 257, 455 
Sulpicia, poetess (fl. end of ist century), 370 
Sulpicius Rufus, Publius, orator (124-88 b.c.), 
122-123, 160 

Sun, T emple of the, 5 1 1-5 1 2, 639 
sundial, 66, 308 
suofetaurilia, 64 

superstition, 60, 61, 93-94, 118, 123, 147-148, 
228, 251, 269, 292, 308, 311, 368, 388, 415, 425, 
442, 485, 500, 515, 517, 522, 599 
Sura, Lucius Licinius, aristocrat (fi. ist and 
2nd centuries). 408 

Surena, Parthian general (fl. 54 b.c.), 529 
surgery, in Etruria, 6; under Rome, 75-76, 104, 
3 1 2-3 1 3, 412, 505 
Surrentine wine, 456 
Surrentum (Sorrento), 322, 456, 457 


Susa, 606 
Susannah, 539 

Swift, JonaJian, English satirist (1667-1745), 
671 

Switzerland, 175, 471, 474 

Symmachus, Samaritan Bible translator (fl. 

late 2nd century), 614 
syphilis, 31 1 

Syracuse, 38, 44, 51, 52, 92, 107, 141, 464, 546 
Syria, 88, 89, 107, 130, 13 1, 140, 170, 176, 178, 
187, 200, 204, 205, 247, 297, 298, 310, 320, 326, 
328, 329, 330, 331, 333, 347*, 364-365, 366, 381, 
390, 413, 428, 431, 487, 495, 500, 510-513, 522- 

5^3, 531. 53^, 535, 543, 544-545, 54^, 558, 577, 
5C8, 595, 601, 602, 603, 606, 620, 623-625, 627, 
629, 630, 633, 636, 639, 651 
Syriac, 187, 495, 604, 630 
‘■Syrian Athens” (.Meleager), 509 

T 

Tabenne, 657 

Tabitha, raised from death by Peter (ist cen- 
tury), 577 
taboos, 60 

Tacapae (Gabes), 465 

Tacitus (Marcus Claudius Tacitus), Roman 
emperor (ca. 200-276), 639 
Tacitus, Caius Cornelius, historian (ca. 55- 
ca. 120), i5t, 160, 224, 261-265, 267, 272, 
273', 273, 276, 277, 279, 280*, 281, 285, 289, 
291, 292, 293, 295, 296, 303, 306, 314, 315, 322, 
365, 366, 387, 433-437, 439, 440, 441, 442, 447, 
463, 476, 478-479, 543, 544, 545, 546, 554, 557, 
372, 612, 636, 639, 671 

Tacitus, Cornelius, procurator and father of 
Tacitus (fl. ist century), 433 
Tagus, 318, 469, 470 

Taine, Hippolyte Adolphe, French historian 
and critic (i'828-i893), 251 
Talleyrand-Perigord, Charles .Maurice de. 
Prince de Benevent, French statesman 
(1754-1838), 195 
Talmud, 548, 549, 554, 580, 606 
Tammuz, 523 
Tanagra, 601 

Tanaquil, wife of the first Tarquin (fl. 6th 
century, B.c.), 7, 14 

Tangier ianc. Tingis), 39, 464, 466, 468 
Tanith, 41-42 
trnning, 322 
Tantalus, 245 

Tarentum (Taranto), 35, 37, 38, 74, 78, 97, 

1 16, 133, 188, 297, 377, 455 
tariffs, 80-81 

Tarpeia, daughter of governor (8th century 

B.C.), 13 

Tarpeian Rock, 13, 199, 400 
Tarquin (Lucius Tarquinius Priscus), fifth 
King of vome (fl. 7th and 6th centuries 
B.C.), 7, 14, 18, 82, 358 

Tarquin, Sextus, son of Tarquin the Proud 
(fl. 6th century B.c.), 16 



INDEX 


Tarquin the Proud (Lucius Tarquinius Su- 
perbus), seventh King of Rome (fl. 6ih cen- 
tur>' B.C.), 15-17 

Tarquinii (Corneto), 5, 8, 14, 35, 461 
Tarracina (Terracina), 411 
Tarraco, see Tarragona 
Tarraconensis, 470 

Tarragona (anc. Tarraco), 417, 470, 650 
Tarsus, 203, 204, 3 29, 5 1 3, 54^, 579 t8i , 582,629 
Tartarus, 147, 240, 456 
Tartessus, 39, 40, 469 

Tasso, Torquato, Italian poet (1544-1595), 
258,637,671 

Tatius, Titus, King of the Sabines (Sth cen- 
tury B.C.), 13 
Taurini, 454 

Tauromenium (Taormina), 464 
Taurus, Statilius, general (fi. end of ist cen- 
tury B.C.), 361 
Taurus, 298 
Taurus Mountains, 513 
taverns, see drinking 

taxation, in Carthage, 54; in Judea, 532; under 
Rome, 51, 58, 68, 8o-8i, 89, 91, 103, 116-1 r7, 
120, 126, 129, 139-141, 170, 192-194, 203-204, 
205, 207, 211, 213, 217, 220-221, 224, 227, 261, 
265, 267, 269, 275-276, 287-288, 290, 350, 336, 
337 , 368, 373, 398, 407, 409, 4 ' 5 , 4 < 6 , 4 ^ 3 , 4 ^ 7 , 
432, 448, 4*5^-463, 4 '^ 4 , 482, 483, 487. 498, 499 , 
532, 543, 547, 548, 620, 622, 627, 628, 631-633, 
642-645, 656, 665, 667-668 
Teiresias, 497 
Telamon, 47 
Telephus, 354 

Tellus (Terra Mater), 59, 348, 350*; feast for, 
59 

tempera, 352 

temples, Etruscan, 9; Carthaginian, 40, 41, 42, 
465, 469; under Rome, 62, 64, 79, 81-82, 92, 
193, 219, 225, 226, 268, 269, 279, 280, 287, 290- 

291, 335, 339, 340, 347, 35 b 352, 357-359, 362, 

363, 369, 371, 381, 388,418-421,4:3, 425,4:6- 
427, 440, 453, 455, 456, 458, 459, 460-461, 464, 
465, 466. 470, 473, 476, 477, 480, 498-500, 508- 
509, 5U-512, 513, 515, 516, 519, 52:, 601, 606, 
621, 625, 626, 648, 650, 656 
tenant farmers, 77, 104, iii, 319-320, 631, 644 
te^iidores, 332 

Terence (Publius Terentius Afer), comic 
dramatist (i9o?-i59? b.c.), 90, 97, 98, 99, 
101-102 

Terentia, wife of Cicero ( 11 . ist century b.c.), 
141, 163 

Tergeste (Trieste), 455 

Terme, .Museo delle, 348*, 349, 350, 351 

Terminus, 59 

Terpnos, Nero’s musician (fl. ist centurv), 
278 

Terracina (anc. Anxur), 297 
terra cottas, 18, 82, 347-348 
terramaricoli, 4-5 
Terra .Mater, see Tellus 


747 

Tertia, wife of Cassius and daughter of Ser- 
vilia, q.v. (ist century B.c.), 168 
Tertia, sister of Publius Clodius Pulcher and 
wife of Lucullus (ist century B.c.), 172-173 
Tertulla, wife of Crassus (ist centurv' b.c.), 
168 

Temillian (Quintus Septimius Florens Ter- 
tullianus), Latin father of the Church 
(i6o?-230?), 307, 385, 465, 524, 558, 591, 597, 
598, 603, 612-613, 617, 61S, 647-649, 652, 665 
Tetrabiblios (Ptolemy), 503 
Tetricus, Caius Pcsuv'ius, pretender in Gaul 
(274), 638 

Teutones, 118-119, 472 
textbooks, 159 
textiles, 77, 92, 473, 486, 510 
Thallus, secretary to Augustus, 229 
Thallus, pagan commentator on Christ (fl. ist 
century), 555 

Thames (anc. Tamesis), 176, 179, 441, 477 
Thamugadi (Timgad), 466 
Thapsacus, 512 

Thapsus, battle in 46 b.c., 54, 189, 465, 466 
Theagenes, 636 

theater, 98-99, 133, 193, 219, 266-267, 274, 278, 
296, 302, 316, 317, 319, 340, 352, 357, 360, 362, 
363. 369, 371, 577-379, 381, 418-419, 421, 456, 
458-459. 464, 466, 470, 473, 474, 480, 499, 508- 
509. 513. 515. 532, 548, 598. 612-613 
Thebaid, 445 
Thebaid (Statius), 316 

Thebes (anc. Thebac), 316, 483, 498, 499, 630 
Theocritus, Greek pastoral poet (fl. 3rd cen- 
tury B.C.), 235, 236, 637 

Theodora, wife of Constantine (4ch century), 

653 

Theodosius I the Great (Flavius Theodosius), 
Roman emperor ( 346? -395 ), 486 
Tlieodotians, 605 

Theodotion, Bible translator (fl. 2nd cen- 
tury), 614 

theology, 304, 308, 501-502, 522-525, 547-548, 

553-554. 556, 562, 575. 582, 586-590. 594-595. 

601, 603-615, 618, 626, 635, 656, 658-661 
Theophila, philosopher and friend of .Mar- 
tial, 370 

Theophrastus, Greek philosopher (r-287 
B.C.), 310, 31 1, 490 

Theopompus, Greek historian (ca. 378-? b.c.), 
7 

Thera pezitae, 525 
thennae, -see baths, public 
Thernius, Marcus .Minucius, general (fl. ist 
century- B.c.), 167 
Theseus, 354 

Thessalonians, The First Epistle of Paul the 
Apostle to the. 587* 

Thessalonians, The Second Epistle of Paul the 
Apostle to the, 587*, 591 
Thessalonica (Salonik.i), 78, 324, 483, 546, 583, 
5S5, 591, 602, 630, 637, 6 j 5 
Thessaly-, 184, 1S5, 467, 483, 519 



INDEX 


748 

Third Legion, 466 
Thirteenth Legion, 182 
Thisbe, 256 
Thoreau, Henry David, American philoso- 
pher and writer (1817-1862), 609 
Thrace, 203, 366, 482, 483, 516, 519, 595, 630, 
632, 633, 639, 655 

Thrasea, Publius Paetus, Stoic philosopher 
and senator (?-66), 279, 282, 300, 426, 441 
Thrasymachus, Greek Sophist and rhetori- 
cian (fl. 5th century B.c.), 96 
Thucydides, Greek historian (471? -400? B.C.), 
4 

Thugga (Dougga),465 
Thurii (Terra Nuova), 37, 51, 138 
Thysdrus (El. Djem), 465 
Tiber, 5, ii, 17, 36, 62, 65, 78, 81, 94, iij, 117, 
I59> 179. 193- 253, 265- 270- 278, 280, 283, 285, 
325, 326, 327, 339, 365, 366, 378, 410, 422, 439, 

453, 625, 654 

Tiberias (Tabariah), 535, 644 
Tiberius (Tiberius Claudius Nero Caesar), 
Roman emperor (42 b.c.-a.d. 37), 215, 217, 
229, 230-231, 232, 234, 248, 259-265, 266, 268, 
27O) 275, 281, 290, 291, 292, 293, 323, 329, 
331-332, 344, 347, 350, 358, 365*, 37', 373, 
386, 434, 436, 478, 543, 558, 560 
TibuUus, Albius, poet (54-19 b.c.), 60, 155, 
234, 235, 252-253, 370, 407 
Tibur (Tivoli), 35, 78, 121, 155, 252, 344,421, 

454, 638 
Ticino, 49 

Tigellinus, Sophonius, favorite of Nero (?- 
69), 279, 282 

Tigranes, King of Armenia (fl. end of ist 
century b.c.), 217 

Tigranes the Great, King of Armenia 
(reigned 94-56 b.c.), 528 
Tigranocerta (Sert), 528 
Tigris, 546, 627, 641 
time, measurement of, 66-67 
Timocles the Stoic (in Lucian), 496 
Timomachus of Byzantium, Greek painter (fl. 

I St century B.c.), 354 

Timothy, colleague of St. Paul (ist centurvO, 
583,590 

Timothy, The Second Epistle of Paul the 
Apostle to, 590 
Tingis, see Tangier 
Tinia, 7 

Tiridates, King of Armenia (fl. ist centurj ), 
280 

Tiro, Marcus Tullius, writer and secretary' to 
Cicero (fl. ist century B.c.), 163 
Titus (Titus Flavius Sabinus Vespasianus), 
Roman emperor (40-81), 287, 288-289, 290, 
291, 345, 348-349, 351, 359, 36', 365, 375, 383, 
404, 419, 533, 538, 544-545, 546, 577, 603 
Titus, Arch of, 348-349, 357, 412 
Titus, Baths of, 291, 345, 359, 375 
Titus, colleague who forsook St. Paul (1st 
cenniry), 590 


Tiu (Tyr), 479 
toga, 70 

Toletum (Toledo), 470 
Tolosa (Toulouse), 473 
Tolstoy, Count Leo Nikolaevich, Russian 
novelist (1828-1910), 301, 537 
Tomb of the Lioness (at Corneto), ii 
tombs, in Etruria, 6, 7, 8, 339, 443; under 
Rome, 57, 69, 84, 226, 243, 284, 298, 334, 348, 
3 89, 41 4, 443 , 474; in Saba, 508; (Christian, 601 
Tomi (Constanta), 232, 256-257, 301, 480 
T02/2 Jones (Fielding), 299 
Torah, 535-542, 547-549, 560, 567-568, 576-571, 
579, 580, 581, 585-589, 591, 595, 605 
Torlonia, Villa, 454* 

T orquatus, Manlius ( Caius Nonius Asprenas? ) , 
friend of Horace (fl. ist century B.c.), 233 
Torquatus, Titus iVIanlius Imperiosus, dicta- 
tor (fl. 363-340 B.C.), 37* 

Torso Belvedere (Apollonius of Athens), 349 
torture, 267, 270, 285, 292, 334, 395, 403, 424, 
529, 534, 615, 643, 649, 651-652 
totemism, 60 

Toulouse (one. Tolosa), 650 
town planning, 356 

trade, Etruscan, 6; Carthaginian, 40-41, 54, 
105, 106, 107; under Rome, 38, 54, 77-81, 88, 
90, 92, 107, III, 1 16, 1 18, 139-140, 170, 190, 
205, 211-212, 215, 218-219, Z33, 321-322, 324- 
326, 328-331, 332-334, 336-337, 340-342, 362, 
364-365, 399, 4", 432, 448, 454, 455, 456, 465, 
466, 470-471, 473, 474, 476, 477, 480, 482-483, 
486, 487, 499, 508, 310, 514, 520, 528-529, 532, 
535, 579, 632-633, 642-644, 665, 668, 671 
trade routes, 413, 455, 508, 51 1-512, 529, 602, 632 
632 

tragedy, 74-73, 98, 301-302, 378 
Traiana, Via, 410 

Trajan (.Marcus Ulpius Nerva Trajanus), 
Roman emperor (52-117), 28, 97, 234, 275, 
291, 299, 307, 322, 326, 330, 335, 341, 345, 349, 
361, 368, 371, 375, 387, 393, 408-413, 414, 433, 
434, 436, 439, 441, 442, 455, 456, 457, 470, 480, 
499, 5°8, 510, 520, 521, 528, 554, 599, 628, 634, 
648, 662 

Trajan, Arch of, 41 1 
Trajan, Baths of, 345, 375, 635 
Trajan, Column of, 411-412, 413, 442-443 
Trajan, Temple of, 41 1 

Tralles (Smyrna), 312, 329, 431, 504, 515, 546, 
592, 603, 617, 648, 650 

Tranquillity of the Soul, On the (Seneca), 302 
Transjordania, 530 

transport, 77-78, 271, 323-6, 328, 339, 341, 41 1, 
473, 477, 499, 668 
Transylvania, 410 

Trapezus (Trebizond), 418, 518, 520, 629 
Trasimene, Lake {a?ic. Trasimenus, It. Trasi- 
meno or Perugia), battle in 217 b.c., 49 
travel, 323-326 
treaties, violation of, 90 



INDEX 


749 


Trebia (batde, 218 B.c.), 91 
Trebonius, Caius, governor and conspirator 
(?-43 B.C.), 197 

Treves, see Augusta Trevirorum 
tribunes, 22-25, 27, 30, 8j, 114, 126, 139, 191, 
213, 216 

tribute, see taxation 
tributum capitis, 220 
tribumm soli, 220 
triclinimn, 343, 376 
Trimalchio, 297-298, 333, 380 
Trinity, 595, 660 
Trionfi, Via dei, 662 
Tripoli (anc. Tripolis), 464, 465 
Tripoli, see Oea 
Tristia (Ovid), 257-258 
T ristrani Shandy ( Sterne) , 299 
triumphs, 82-83, 86, 119, 121, 136, 138, 170, 171, 
177, 190, 206, 208, 2ri, 219, 271, 272, 283, 288, 
291, 348-349, 365, 381, 413, 428, 432, 466, 545, 
546, 669 

Triumvirate, First, 134, 171, 174, 175-176 

Triumvirate, Second, 201-208, 531 

Troad, the, 157 

Troas, see Alexandria Troas 

Troesmis (Iglitza), 480 

Trojan War, 663 

troubadours, 255, 638 

Troy (anc. Troia, now Hissarlik), 12, 6i, 74, 
190, 239-240, 278, 280, 516, 522, 663 
True Word (Celsus), 606-607 
tuberculosis, 313, 504, 506 
Tullia, daughter of Cicero (fl. ist century 
B.C.), 163, 165 

Tullus, Desumius, millionaire (fl. ist cen- 
tury), 461 

Tullus Hostilius, third King of Rome (fl. 7th 
century B.c.), 13-14 
Tunis, 39, 42 
Tunisia, 105,465 
Turanians, 528 

Turbo, iMarcius Livlanus, general of Trajan 
(fl. 2nd century), 413 
Turin, 254, 654 
Turkestan, 528 
Turkey, 513 
Tumus, 240-241, 278 

Tuscan (Etruscan) style (architecture), 18, 
81, 9-- 357 

Tuscany, 5, 6, ii, 666 

Tuscufan Disputations (Cicero), see Disputa- 
tiones Tusculxnae 
Tusculum, II, 35, 13-1 *‘^-1 454 
Tutumus, 60 
Twelfth Legion, 182 
Twelve Great Gods, 7 

Twelve Tables, 23, 31-33, 72, 75, 79, 83, 99, 
393, 398, 400, 401, 403 
Tyndaris, 247 
Tyne, 417, 476 
typhus, 227 

Tyre, 39, 329, 331, 373. 469. 509. 5'o. 534 


Tyrrha (Tireh),6t 
Tyrrhenian (Etruscan) Sea, 6, 453 

U 

Uffizi Gallery, 348* 

Ulpian (Domitius Ulpianus), jurist (?-228), 
392, 398, 405, 510, 621, 626, 634 
Umbria, 99, 253, 455 
Umbrians, 5, 12, 35, 37, 51, 122 
unemployment, under Rome, 38, 116, 176, 180, 
192, 205, 213, 288, 290, 323, 326, 336, 410, 641; 
‘ in Athens, 418 

United States, 79, 218, 372, 546, 632 
unities, Horace on, 249 
Universal History (Eusebius), 662 
Universal History (Poseidonius), 514 
universities, 465, 474, 487-489, 500, 504, 510, 
515,661 
Urals, 218 

Urban VIII (Maffeo Barberini), Pope (1568- 
16441,420 

urbanization, under the Republic, 90, 1 1 1, 1 13, 
1 18; under the Principate, 222, 237, 286, 319, 
481, 498, 508-509, 510, 516; under the mon- 
archy, 631, 633, 667 
urology, 313, 318 

Ursus, Flavius, friend of Statius (fl. ist cen- 
tuiy), 335 
Ustica, 244 

usury, see moneylending 
Utica (Utique), 39, 40, 80, 106, 107, 186, 188, 
189-190, 325, 418, 465 
Utrecht (atic. Trajectus), 324 

V 

\'alentia (Valencia), 470 
Valentinian I (Flavius \^a]entinlanus), Roman 
emperor in the West (321-375), 665 
Valentinus, Alexandrian heretic (fl. 160), 604 
Valerian (Caius Publius Licinius Valerianus), 
Roman emperor (?-26o), 340, 629, 650 
Valerian Way, 78 
Valerii, Roman clan, 21, 364 
Valerius Maximus, histprian (fl. ist century), 
352, 471-472 

\’andals, 358, 638, 639, 670 
Van Dyke, Sir Anthony, Flemish painter 
(1599-1641), 354 

Van Gogh, \hncent (1853-1890), 355 
\'ardar (me. Axius), 630 
Varro, Caius Terentius, consul and general 
(fl. 216 B.C.), 50 

Varro, .Marcus Terentius, scholar and writer 
1116-26 B.C.), 60, 146, 159-160, 193, 238, 308, 
379. 456. 509 

Varus, Publius Quintilius, governor (?-9 a.d.), 
2 ‘8, 543 

Varus, Quintilius, noble (3-42 b.c.), 203 
\’asari, Giorgio, Italian artist and biographer 
of artists (1511-1574), 349 
vases, see ceramics 
Vatican (hill), 12, 340, 578 



750 


INDEX 


Vatican, the, 348*, 349, 350, 407 
vault, 339, 355-361, 519, 6^1, 671 
vehicles, 323, 341 

Veil (Isola Farnese), 6, 10, 17; tvar with (405- 
396 B.C.), 24, 36, 62, 344 
Velia, 455 

Velitrae (Veletri), 200 
venereal disease, 268, 313 
Veneti, 454-455 
Venetia, 454, 461 
Venice, 429, 455, 516 

Venus, 12, 61, 82, 148-149, 152, 167, 193, 204, 
239, 241, 253, 254, 255, 256, 346, 468, 487, 510, 
511, 548; Venus Genitrix, 349; Venus Pom- 
peiana, 458 

Venus, Temple of, 196 
Venus and Klars, Temple of, see Pantheon 
Venus and Roma, Temple of, 421 
Venusia (Venosa), 78, 244, 455, 546 
Veratius, Lucius, slaveowner (2nd century), 
404 

Verbanus, Lacus, see Maggiore, Lago 
Vercellae (Vercelh), battle in loi B.c., 120 
Vercingetorix, Gallic chief of the Arvemi 

(?-45 B.C.), 176-177 

Verona, 1 1, 78, 154, 155, 410, 429, 434, 628 
Verres, Gains Ciornelius, governor (?-43 b . c .), 
92, 141, 462, 464 
Versailles, 345 

versification, 74, 98, 99, 155, 295; of Lucretius, 
148, 154; of Catullus, 155-158; of Virgil, 256, 
238, 243; of Horace, 244-248; of Tibullus, 
253; of Ovid, 254, 256-258; of Statius, 316; 
of Martial, 317, 318; of Juvenal, 439 
Verulamium (St. Albans), 476 
Verus, Lucius Aurelius (Lucius Ceionius 
Commodus Verus), Roman emperor (127- 
169), 422, 426-428, 430 

Verus, Lucius, friend of Hadrian (?-i38), 
421,422 

Vespasian (Titus Flavius Sabinus Vespasi- 
anus), Roman emperor (9-79), 234, 271, 
284-288, 290, 301, 309, 311, 312, 313, 322, 336, 
337, 341, 345, 348, 351, 358, 361, 365, 368, 378, 
383, 396, 402, 407, 409, 461, 489, 516, 544, 546, 

575 . 

Vespillo, Quintus Lucreuus (fl. ist century), 

370 

Vesta, 12, 58, 61, 518; House of, see Aedes 
Vestae; Temple of, 4, 635 
Vestal Virgins, 61, 63, 94, 133, 142, 199, 202, 
206, 290, 348, 351, 370, 388, 397. 622; Palace 
of, see Atriu?}i Vestae 
Vesuvius, 137, 289, 346, 352, 4 j 6, 457 
veterinarians, 313 
Vettii, House of, 352-353 
Vetulonia, 17* 
viaducts, 326 

Victor I, Roman Pope (ca. 190-198), 617 
Victor, Sextus Aurelius, writer (fl. 4th cen- 
tury), 641 

Victory, 627; Temple of, 94 


Victor;. Hill, see Clivus Victotiae 
Vicus Lorarius, 342 
Vicus Margaritarius, 342 
\'icus Sanoalarius, 342 
\’icus Vitrarius, 342 

Vienna (anc. Vindobona), 78, 324, 346, 432, . 

4S0, 633 I 

Vienne, 49, 649 

Villa Item, 354 i 

X’illanova, 5; culture, 5, 9; migrants from, ii \ 
villas, see mansions 

Viminal, 12*, 340, 342 * 

\'iminal Gate, 263 | 

Vinci, Leonardo da, Italian artist (1452-1519), ■ 

220, 232, 356 

\hndex, Caius Julius, legate of Gallia Lug- j 
dunensis (fl. ist century), 283, 473 
Vindobona, see \"ienna i 

Vindonissa (Windisch), 480 
vineyards, 320, 344, 456, 464, 473, 535. .631, 639 
Vipsania Agrippina, daughter of Agrippa (fl. 

ist century B.c.), 230, 259 , 

Virbius (‘‘King of the Woods”), 62 
Virgil (Publius Vergilius [or Virgilius] 
Alaro), poet (70-19 b.c.), 3, 8, 60, 61, 74, 98, 
JOL 154, 155, 157, 158, 205, 215, 225, 233, 234, ; 
235-244, 245, 248, 250, 251, 252, 258, 278, 283, 
307, 348, 382, 438, 441, 454, 456, 625, 671 
Virgin, 236-237 

\’irginia, daughter of Lucius Virginius (5th 
century b.c,), 23, 72 

Virginius, Lucius, plebeian ( 5th century b . c . ) , ' 
Ji 

Virgo, 298 I 

Viriathus, Lusitanian leader (fl. 2nd century 
^_B.c.), 87 ! 

Viroconium ( Wroxeter) , 477 ' 

\artue, 358; Temple of, 358 j 

Virrtitibus, De (Cicero), 163* j 

\'isigoths, 670 j 

\'istula, 478 I 

vitalism, 507 

\'itellius (Aulus Vitellius Germanicus), Ro- j 
man emperor (15-69), 268, 284-285, 287 ^ 

\'itruvius Pollio, Marcus, architect and engi- i 
neer (ist century B.c.), 9, 343*, 356 ■ 

vivisection, 504-505, 506 

V oconia, lex, 224, 399 ; 

Volga {anc. Rha), 669 1 

Volney, Comte de, Constantin Francois de j 
Chasseboeuf, French skeptical author 
(1757-1820), 553 [ 

Vologases III, IGng of Parthia (fl. 2nd cen- 
tury), 428 

Vologases IV, King of Parthia (?-209), 530 , 

Vologases V, King of Parthia (.^-227?), 530 
Volscians, 15, 35, 36, 37, 326t 
Voltaire, Frangois Marie Arouet de, French 
writer (1694-1778), 99, 131, 154, 225, 244 
304, 495, 497, 553 
vote buying, 128-129, 19^ 
vows, 64-65, 3 1 1, 606 


INDEX 


Vulcan, 59, 63 
Vulci, 9 

Vulso, Cnaeus Manlius, general ( 11 . 2nd cen- 
tury B.C.), 88 

W 

wages. III, 112, 632, 642-643 
Walden Pond, 609 
Wales, 36, 73, 475, 477 
Wall Street, 340 

war, 24, 80, 81, 83, 85, 86, 90, 91, 96, 193, 198, 
232, 233, 242, 253, 255, 261, 301, 310, 330, 336- 
337, 387, 424, 478, 602, 622, 632, 636, 641, 650, 
665, 666, 667 

W^ar of the Mercenaries, 46 
Wars of the Jews, The (Josephus), 546 
Washington, D. C., 356 
water clock, see clepsydra 
watering places, 133, 324, 377, 456, 477, 664 
water supply, of Rome, 220, 281, 326-328, 343; 
in Italian cities, 461; in Syria, 511, 512; in 
Smyrna, 515 

Watt, James, Scottish incentor (1736-1819), 
504 

Watteau, Jean Antoine, French painter ( 1684- 

1721), 351 

wealth, 88-89,90, 91, 95, 108, 118, 128, 130-134, 
212, 221, 337, 339, 391, 399, 448, 483, 510-512, 
514, 631-633, 657, 667 
weapons, 33, 77, 106-107, 3^2) 3^8* 
weddings, 223, 379 
weights, 78 

West, the, 154, 188, 203, 208, 234, 251, 283, 329, 
331, 366, 389, 392, 406, 420, 463, 473, 475, 481, 
512, 529, 603, 605, 612, 616-617, 629, 640, 644, 
654, 657, 661, 665, 666, 669, 670, 671 
Westminster Hall, 635 

Wieland, Christopher .Martin, German poet 
and novelist (1733-1813), 553 
Winchester iatic. Venta Belgarum), 477 
Winckelmann, Johann Joachim, German 
archeologist and art historian (1717-1768), 
349 

Wisdom of Solomon, Book of the, 540, 541, 
589 

Wissowa, George, German classical philolo- 
gist (1859-1931), 504* 
witchcraft, 526, 559 
Wodin (Odin), 479 

Wolfenbiittel Vragr, rents (Reimarus), 553 
Wolf of the Capitol, 82 

woman, in Etruria, 7, 18; in Carthage, 41; in 
early Rome, 18, 57-58, 89-90, 99; in the later 
Republic, 134-135; under the Principate, 
222-224, 300-3017 3 ‘37 368, 369-373, 378, 395- 
396, 399-400, 438, 485, 505, 596-597; under 
the monarchy, 634, 636; in Germany, 478- 


751 

479; in Parthia, 529; Paul and Christianity 
on, 590, 596-597, 601 

Wordsworth, William, English poet (1770- 
1850), 147 

works, good, 589, 663 

wrestling, in Etruria, 7; in Rome, 382 

writing materials, 73 

X 

Xanten (one. Colonia Trajana), 176 
Xantho (in Philodemus), 510 
Xanthus, 203, 513 

Xenophon, Athenian historian and general 
435 ?- 3 i 5 ?). 132, Sto, 636 

y 

Yabne, see Jamnia 

Yahveh, 390, 529, 533, 534, 535, 540, 543, 558, 
567, 604, 605, 607, 614, 615 
Yarhibol, 51 1 
Yemen, see Arabia Felix 
York {me. Eboracum), 78, 477, 622, 653 
Youth Games, see ludi iuvenales 
Yugoslavia, 480 

Z 

Zadok, Jewish founder of the Sadducees, 536 
Zaleucus, Greek lawgiver (fl. 660 b.c.), 32 
Zama (battle of, 202 B.c.), 49, 53, 85, 91, 92, 105 
Zebedee, father of apostles James and John 
(ist centurj'), 563. 577 
Zela, battle in 47 b.c., 188 
Zeno, Greek Stoic philosopher (3 36? -264.’ 

B.C.), 154*, 196, 249, 304, 346, 421, 455, 514 
Zenobia, Septimia, Queen of Palmyra (.'-after 
272), 454, 630, 633, 636*, 638, 669 
Zenodorus, Greek sculptor (fl. ist century), 
342. 3 ;i. -173 

Zenophila (in Meleager), 509 
Zephyrinus, Roman Pope (ca. 198-ca. 218), 
617 

Zerubbabel, Hebrew prince (fl. 520 b.c.), 533 
Zeugma, 512 

Zeus, 61, 63, 353, 390, 487, 495-496; Zeus Pan- 
hellenicos, 418; Zeus the Olympian, 418 
Zens, 461 

Zens (Pheidias), 486 

Zeu.xis, Greek painter (fl. 430 b.c.), 351 

Zion, 535 

zodiac, 298 

Zola, Emile, French novelist (1840-1902), 412 
zoological gardens, 384 

Zoroastrianism, 524-525, 529-530, 537, 540, 558, 
595, 596, 600'', 606, 639, 654; see also Mithras 
Zosimus, Greek historian (fl. 5th century), 
663 



A NOTE ABOUT THE AUTHOR 


Will Durant’s childhood was spejit at North Adatns, Mass., aitd Kearny, 
N. J. He was educated in the Catholic parochial schools of these cities, and 
thereafter at St. Peter’s {Jesuit) College, Jersey City, aiid Columbia Uni- 
versity, New York. For a summer he served as cub reporter on the New 
York Journal, m ipoy; but finding the work too exciting for his tempera?nent 
he contented hmiself with teaching Latin, Frettch, English, and other sub- 
jects at Seton Hall College, South Orange, N.J. (i poj- ii). He entered the 
setninary there in ipop, but withdrew in ipii, for reasons which he has 
described in his book. Transition. He passed from a seminary to the radical 
circles inNew York, and became the teacher of the Ferrer School (ipn-ip), 
an experiment in libertarian education, hi ipi2 he toured Europe at the 
expense of Alden Freeman, who had befriended him and had undertaken to 
broaden his borders. In ipi^ he gave himself over to graduate studies at 
Columbia University, specializing in biology under Morgan and Calkhis, 
and m philosophy under Woodbridge and Dewey. He received the Ph.D. 
degree there in ipiy, and taught philosophy at Cohnnbia University for one 
year. In ipi^ he began, in a Presbyterian church at Fourteenth Street and 
Second Avenue, New York, those lectures on the. history of philosophy and 
literature which prepared him for The Story of Philosophy and The Story 
of Civilization; for his audiences there were mostly workingmen and 
women, who demanded complete clarity, and some contetnporary signifi- 
cance to all historical material considered worthy of study. In ipzi he organ- 
ized the Labor Temple School, which became one of the most successful 
of recent experiments in adidt education. He retired in i pay to devote him- 
self to The Story of Civilization. He toured Europe again m ipiy; went 
around the world for a study of Egypt, the Near East, hidia, China, and 
Japan in ip^o; and circled the globe again in ippz to visit Japan, Manchuria, 
Siberia, and Russia. These travels weiit towards making Our Oriental 
Heritage, the first volume of The Story of Civilization, the magisterial work 
it is. Before embarking on the writing of the second volume. The Life of 
Greece, Dr. Durant spent a long sinmner in Greece, visiting the famous sites 
and examining the remains of Hellenic civilization. His Mediterranean travels 
have enriched the background of Caesar and Christ, the third part of The 
Story of Civilization. 




cuzcC SICILY 







52* -, \\\A ^ 

uiA wv 







b ^ 
0 


? 4^ 

V jN 

f S#?v''5C/'h\ 
'f 

'«• ^ 

^'" *r 

&)-' KS^»'^ i 

3i 

1^1 feJCil) 


r 

5 Ss^^. 

Z, 

> 

O K1 «, 

I 2 ^ 





Pl«|^§ V' 

r a 3 <,5^ 

# f '§ 5 
^ ss b 3 . 


S C! 

Sil"' 


#tri 


doiMi4, 







-, 0 
5 > 


L W.s ■' ^ 

Ws^r*! 


^:«C WSL 





I* 2;\v,r, ''*'' 


. '•'a 

'"i? 


^ _jt -^vJ? 

S.S 

g 5 yw? 
'•^sua s 






MM 

'tfel n'^ ^ 5 




I?'?® 

^ '2t ' 





/>■''■ ^ijHa.;S';s»g •g'/s 

4 o 


ft^JIa/a* '.S #'i?# '' M '3 ^ m Ji^ I 

t I 


D.G.A. 80, 

CENTRAL ARCHAEOLOGICAL LIBRARY 
NEW DELHI 

Call No. — 90l/Dvr - 15167, 

Author— Durant, Will, 

XitJe-^^*®®^^ Christ. 

(Story of civilization vol.3). 

( I '"“^ 

Borrower’s Name 1 Date of Issue | Date of Return 
‘M &oo^ tkaf is shut is hut a block'' 

^CSiAEOLOG^p^ 

^ GOVT. OF INDIA 

^ Department of Archaeology 

§ NEW DELHI. T, 

s ^ 


«:% A'- 

^ = A* 

w 


Please help us to keep the book 
clean and moving. 


S. a, 148. N. DELHI. 